docs/platforms/mac/remote.md, before:

---
summary: "macOS app flow for controlling a remote Clawdbot gateway over SSH"
read_when:
  - Setting up or debugging remote mac control
---
# Remote Clawdbot (macOS ⇄ remote host)


This flow lets the macOS app act as a full remote control for a Clawdbot gateway running on another host (desktop/server). It’s the app’s **Remote over SSH** (remote run) feature. All features—health checks, Voice Wake forwarding, and Web Chat—reuse the same remote SSH configuration from *Settings → General*.

## Modes
- **Local (this Mac)**: Everything runs on the laptop. No SSH involved.
- **Remote over SSH (default)**: Clawdbot commands are executed on the remote host. The mac app opens an SSH connection with `-o BatchMode` plus your chosen identity/key and a local port-forward.
- **Remote direct (ws/wss)**: No SSH tunnel. The mac app connects to the gateway URL directly (for example, via Tailscale Serve or a public HTTPS reverse proxy).

## Remote transports
Remote mode supports two transports:
- **SSH tunnel** (default): Uses `ssh -N -L ...` to forward the gateway port to localhost. The gateway will see the node’s IP as `127.0.0.1` because the tunnel is loopback.
- **Direct (ws/wss)**: Connects straight to the gateway URL. The gateway sees the real client IP.

## Prereqs on the remote host
1) Install Node + pnpm and build/install the Clawdbot CLI (`pnpm install && pnpm build && pnpm link --global`).
2) Ensure `clawdbot` is on PATH for non-interactive shells (symlink into `/usr/local/bin` or `/opt/homebrew/bin` if needed).
3) Open SSH with key auth. We recommend **Tailscale** IPs for stable reachability off-LAN.

## macOS app setup
1) Open *Settings → General*.
2) Under **Clawdbot runs**, pick **Remote over SSH** and set:
   - **Transport**: **SSH tunnel** or **Direct (ws/wss)**.
   - **SSH target**: `user@host` (optional `:port`).
     - If the gateway is on the same LAN and advertises Bonjour, pick it from the discovered list to auto-fill this field.
   - **Gateway URL** (Direct only): `wss://gateway.example.ts.net` (or `ws://...` for local/LAN).
   - **Identity file** (advanced): path to your key.
   - **Project root** (advanced): remote checkout path used for commands.
   - **CLI path** (advanced): optional path to a runnable `clawdbot` entrypoint/binary (auto-filled when advertised).
3) Hit **Test remote**. Success indicates the remote `clawdbot status --json` runs correctly. Failures usually mean PATH/CLI issues; exit 127 means the CLI isn’t found remotely.
4) Health checks and Web Chat will now run through this SSH tunnel automatically.

## Web Chat
- **SSH tunnel**: Web Chat connects to the gateway over the forwarded WebSocket control port (default 18789).
- **Direct (ws/wss)**: Web Chat connects straight to the configured gateway URL.
- There is no separate WebChat HTTP server anymore.

## Permissions
- The remote host needs the same TCC approvals as local (Automation, Accessibility, Screen Recording, Microphone, Speech Recognition, Notifications). Run onboarding on that machine to grant them once.
- Nodes advertise their permission state via `node.list` / `node.describe` so agents know what’s available.

## Security notes
- Prefer loopback binds on the remote host and connect via SSH or Tailscale.
- If you bind the Gateway to a non-loopback interface, require token/password auth.
- See [Security](/gateway/security) and [Tailscale](/gateway/tailscale).

## WhatsApp login flow (remote)
- Run `clawdbot channels login --verbose` **on the remote host**. Scan the QR with WhatsApp on your phone.
- Re-run login on that host if auth expires. Health check will surface link problems.

## Troubleshooting
- **exit 127 / not found**: `clawdbot` isn’t on PATH for non-login shells. Add it to `/etc/paths`, your shell rc, or symlink into `/usr/local/bin`/`/opt/homebrew/bin`.
- **Health probe failed**: check SSH reachability, PATH, and that Baileys is logged in (`clawdbot status --json`).
- **Web Chat stuck**: confirm the gateway is running on the remote host and the forwarded port matches the gateway WS port; the UI requires a healthy WS connection.
- **Node IP shows 127.0.0.1**: expected with the SSH tunnel. Switch **Transport** to **Direct (ws/wss)** if you want the gateway to see the real client IP.
- **Voice Wake**: trigger phrases are forwarded automatically in remote mode; no separate forwarder is needed.

## Notification sounds
Pick sounds per notification from scripts with `clawdbot` and `node.invoke`, e.g.:

```bash
clawdbot nodes notify --node <id> --title "Ping" --body "Remote gateway ready" --sound Glass
```

There is no global “default sound” toggle in the app anymore; callers choose a sound (or none) per request.

Commit message:

refactor: rename clawdbot to moltbot with legacy compat

docs/platforms/mac/remote.md, after:

---
summary: "macOS app flow for controlling a remote Moltbot gateway over SSH"
read_when:
  - Setting up or debugging remote mac control
---
# Remote Moltbot (macOS ⇄ remote host)


This flow lets the macOS app act as a full remote control for a Moltbot gateway running on another host (desktop/server). It’s the app’s **Remote over SSH** (remote run) feature. All features—health checks, Voice Wake forwarding, and Web Chat—reuse the same remote SSH configuration from *Settings → General*.

## Modes
- **Local (this Mac)**: Everything runs on the laptop. No SSH involved.
- **Remote over SSH (default)**: Moltbot commands are executed on the remote host. The mac app opens an SSH connection with `-o BatchMode` plus your chosen identity/key and a local port-forward.
- **Remote direct (ws/wss)**: No SSH tunnel. The mac app connects to the gateway URL directly (for example, via Tailscale Serve or a public HTTPS reverse proxy).

## Remote transports
Remote mode supports two transports:
- **SSH tunnel** (default): Uses `ssh -N -L ...` to forward the gateway port to localhost. The gateway will see the node’s IP as `127.0.0.1` because the tunnel is loopback.
- **Direct (ws/wss)**: Connects straight to the gateway URL. The gateway sees the real client IP.

## Prereqs on the remote host
1) Install Node + pnpm and build/install the Moltbot CLI (`pnpm install && pnpm build && pnpm link --global`).
2) Ensure `moltbot` is on PATH for non-interactive shells (symlink into `/usr/local/bin` or `/opt/homebrew/bin` if needed).
3) Open SSH with key auth. We recommend **Tailscale** IPs for stable reachability off-LAN.

## macOS app setup
1) Open *Settings → General*.
2) Under **Moltbot runs**, pick **Remote over SSH** and set:
   - **Transport**: **SSH tunnel** or **Direct (ws/wss)**.
   - **SSH target**: `user@host` (optional `:port`).
     - If the gateway is on the same LAN and advertises Bonjour, pick it from the discovered list to auto-fill this field.
   - **Gateway URL** (Direct only): `wss://gateway.example.ts.net` (or `ws://...` for local/LAN).
   - **Identity file** (advanced): path to your key.
   - **Project root** (advanced): remote checkout path used for commands.
   - **CLI path** (advanced): optional path to a runnable `moltbot` entrypoint/binary (auto-filled when advertised).
3) Hit **Test remote**. Success indicates the remote `moltbot status --json` runs correctly. Failures usually mean PATH/CLI issues; exit 127 means the CLI isn’t found remotely.
4) Health checks and Web Chat will now run through this SSH tunnel automatically.

## Web Chat
- **SSH tunnel**: Web Chat connects to the gateway over the forwarded WebSocket control port (default 18789).
- **Direct (ws/wss)**: Web Chat connects straight to the configured gateway URL.
- There is no separate WebChat HTTP server anymore.

## Permissions
- The remote host needs the same TCC approvals as local (Automation, Accessibility, Screen Recording, Microphone, Speech Recognition, Notifications). Run onboarding on that machine to grant them once.
- Nodes advertise their permission state via `node.list` / `node.describe` so agents know what’s available.

## Security notes
- Prefer loopback binds on the remote host and connect via SSH or Tailscale.
- If you bind the Gateway to a non-loopback interface, require token/password auth.
- See [Security](/gateway/security) and [Tailscale](/gateway/tailscale).

## WhatsApp login flow (remote)
- Run `moltbot channels login --verbose` **on the remote host**. Scan the QR with WhatsApp on your phone.
- Re-run login on that host if auth expires. Health check will surface link problems.

## Troubleshooting
- **exit 127 / not found**: `moltbot` isn’t on PATH for non-login shells. Add it to `/etc/paths`, your shell rc, or symlink into `/usr/local/bin`/`/opt/homebrew/bin`.
- **Health probe failed**: check SSH reachability, PATH, and that Baileys is logged in (`moltbot status --json`).
- **Web Chat stuck**: confirm the gateway is running on the remote host and the forwarded port matches the gateway WS port; the UI requires a healthy WS connection.
- **Node IP shows 127.0.0.1**: expected with the SSH tunnel. Switch **Transport** to **Direct (ws/wss)** if you want the gateway to see the real client IP.
- **Voice Wake**: trigger phrases are forwarded automatically in remote mode; no separate forwarder is needed.

## Notification sounds
Pick sounds per notification from scripts with `moltbot` and `node.invoke`, e.g.:

```bash
moltbot nodes notify --node <id> --title "Ping" --body "Remote gateway ready" --sound Glass
```

There is no global “default sound” toggle in the app anymore; callers choose a sound (or none) per request.
