docs/concepts/agent.md, before:

---
summary: "Agent runtime (embedded p-mono), workspace contract, and session bootstrap"
read_when:
  - Changing agent runtime, workspace bootstrap, or session behavior
---
# Agent Runtime 🤖

Clawdbot runs a single embedded agent runtime derived from **p-mono**.

## Workspace (required)

Clawdbot uses a single agent workspace directory (`agents.defaults.workspace`) as the agent’s **only** working directory (`cwd`) for tools and context.

Recommended: use `clawdbot setup` to create `~/.clawdbot/clawdbot.json` if missing and initialize the workspace files.

Full workspace layout + backup guide: [Agent workspace](/concepts/agent-workspace)

If `agents.defaults.sandbox` is enabled, non-main sessions can override this with
per-session workspaces under `agents.defaults.sandbox.workspaceRoot` (see
[Gateway configuration](/gateway/configuration)).

## Bootstrap files (injected)

Inside `agents.defaults.workspace`, Clawdbot expects these user-editable files:
- `AGENTS.md` — operating instructions + “memory”
- `SOUL.md` — persona, boundaries, tone
- `TOOLS.md` — user-maintained tool notes (e.g. `imsg`, `sag`, conventions)
- `BOOTSTRAP.md` — one-time first-run ritual (deleted after completion)
- `IDENTITY.md` — agent name/vibe/emoji
- `USER.md` — user profile + preferred address

On the first turn of a new session, Clawdbot injects the contents of these files directly into the agent context.

Blank files are skipped. Large files are trimmed and truncated with a marker so prompts stay lean (read the file for full content).

If a file is missing, Clawdbot injects a single “missing file” marker line (and `clawdbot setup` will create a safe default template).

`BOOTSTRAP.md` is only created for a **brand new workspace** (no other bootstrap files present). If you delete it after completing the ritual, it should not be recreated on later restarts.

To disable bootstrap file creation entirely (for pre-seeded workspaces), set:

```json5
{ agent: { skipBootstrap: true } }
```

## Built-in tools

Core tools (read/exec/edit/write and related system tools) are always available. `TOOLS.md` does **not** control which tools exist; it’s guidance for how *you* want them used.

## Skills

Clawdbot loads skills from three locations (workspace wins on name conflict):
- Bundled (shipped with the install)
- Managed/local: `~/.clawdbot/skills`
- Workspace: `<workspace>/skills`

Skills can be gated by config/env (see `skills` in [Gateway configuration](/gateway/configuration)).

## p-mono integration

Clawdbot reuses pieces of the p-mono codebase (models/tools), but **session management, discovery, and tool wiring are Clawdbot-owned**.

- No p-coding agent runtime.
- No `~/.pi/agent` or `<workspace>/.pi` settings are consulted.

## Sessions

Session transcripts are stored as JSONL at:
- `~/.clawdbot/agents/<agentId>/sessions/<SessionId>.jsonl`

The session ID is stable and chosen by Clawdbot.
Legacy Pi/Tau session folders are **not** read.

## Steering while streaming

When queue mode is `steer`, inbound messages are injected into the current run.
The queue is checked **after each tool call**; if a queued message is present,
remaining tool calls from the current assistant message are skipped (error tool
results with "Skipped due to queued user message."), then the queued user
message is injected before the next assistant response.

When queue mode is `followup` or `collect`, inbound messages are held until the
current turn ends, then a new agent turn starts with the queued payloads. See
[Queue](/concepts/queue) for mode + debounce/cap behavior.

Block streaming sends completed assistant blocks as soon as they finish; it is
**off by default** (`agents.defaults.blockStreamingDefault: "off"`).
Tune the boundary via `agents.defaults.blockStreamingBreak` (`text_end` vs `message_end`; defaults to text_end).
Control soft block chunking with `agents.defaults.blockStreamingChunk` (defaults to
800–1200 chars; prefers paragraph breaks, then newlines; sentences last).
Coalesce streamed chunks with `agents.defaults.blockStreamingCoalesce` to reduce
single-line spam (idle-based merging before send). Non-Telegram providers require
explicit `*.blockStreaming: true` to enable block replies.
Verbose tool summaries are emitted at tool start (no debounce); Control UI
streams tool output via agent events when available.
More details: [Streaming + chunking](/concepts/streaming).

## Configuration (minimal)

At minimum, set:
- `agents.defaults.workspace`
- `whatsapp.allowFrom` (strongly recommended)

---

*Next: [Group Chats](/concepts/group-messages)* 🦞

Commit message:

feat: add apply_patch tool (exec-gated)

docs/concepts/agent.md, after:

---
summary: "Agent runtime (embedded p-mono), workspace contract, and session bootstrap"
read_when:
  - Changing agent runtime, workspace bootstrap, or session behavior
---
# Agent Runtime 🤖

Clawdbot runs a single embedded agent runtime derived from **p-mono**.

## Workspace (required)

Clawdbot uses a single agent workspace directory (`agents.defaults.workspace`) as the agent’s **only** working directory (`cwd`) for tools and context.

Recommended: use `clawdbot setup` to create `~/.clawdbot/clawdbot.json` if missing and initialize the workspace files.

Full workspace layout + backup guide: [Agent workspace](/concepts/agent-workspace)

If `agents.defaults.sandbox` is enabled, non-main sessions can override this with
per-session workspaces under `agents.defaults.sandbox.workspaceRoot` (see
[Gateway configuration](/gateway/configuration)).

## Bootstrap files (injected)

Inside `agents.defaults.workspace`, Clawdbot expects these user-editable files:
- `AGENTS.md` — operating instructions + “memory”
- `SOUL.md` — persona, boundaries, tone
- `TOOLS.md` — user-maintained tool notes (e.g. `imsg`, `sag`, conventions)
- `BOOTSTRAP.md` — one-time first-run ritual (deleted after completion)
- `IDENTITY.md` — agent name/vibe/emoji
- `USER.md` — user profile + preferred address

On the first turn of a new session, Clawdbot injects the contents of these files directly into the agent context.

Blank files are skipped. Large files are trimmed and truncated with a marker so prompts stay lean (read the file for full content).

If a file is missing, Clawdbot injects a single “missing file” marker line (and `clawdbot setup` will create a safe default template).

`BOOTSTRAP.md` is only created for a **brand new workspace** (no other bootstrap files present). If you delete it after completing the ritual, it should not be recreated on later restarts.

To disable bootstrap file creation entirely (for pre-seeded workspaces), set:

```json5
{ agent: { skipBootstrap: true } }
```

## Built-in tools

Core tools (read/exec/edit/write and related system tools) are always available,
subject to tool policy. `apply_patch` is optional and gated by
`tools.exec.applyPatch`. `TOOLS.md` does **not** control which tools exist; it’s
guidance for how *you* want them used.

## Skills

Clawdbot loads skills from three locations (workspace wins on name conflict):
- Bundled (shipped with the install)
- Managed/local: `~/.clawdbot/skills`
- Workspace: `<workspace>/skills`

Skills can be gated by config/env (see `skills` in [Gateway configuration](/gateway/configuration)).

## p-mono integration

Clawdbot reuses pieces of the p-mono codebase (models/tools), but **session management, discovery, and tool wiring are Clawdbot-owned**.

- No p-coding agent runtime.
- No `~/.pi/agent` or `<workspace>/.pi` settings are consulted.

## Sessions

Session transcripts are stored as JSONL at:
- `~/.clawdbot/agents/<agentId>/sessions/<SessionId>.jsonl`

The session ID is stable and chosen by Clawdbot.
Legacy Pi/Tau session folders are **not** read.

## Steering while streaming

When queue mode is `steer`, inbound messages are injected into the current run.
The queue is checked **after each tool call**; if a queued message is present,
remaining tool calls from the current assistant message are skipped (error tool
results with "Skipped due to queued user message."), then the queued user
message is injected before the next assistant response.

When queue mode is `followup` or `collect`, inbound messages are held until the
current turn ends, then a new agent turn starts with the queued payloads. See
[Queue](/concepts/queue) for mode + debounce/cap behavior.

Block streaming sends completed assistant blocks as soon as they finish; it is
**off by default** (`agents.defaults.blockStreamingDefault: "off"`).
Tune the boundary via `agents.defaults.blockStreamingBreak` (`text_end` vs `message_end`; defaults to text_end).
Control soft block chunking with `agents.defaults.blockStreamingChunk` (defaults to
800–1200 chars; prefers paragraph breaks, then newlines; sentences last).
Coalesce streamed chunks with `agents.defaults.blockStreamingCoalesce` to reduce
single-line spam (idle-based merging before send). Non-Telegram providers require
explicit `*.blockStreaming: true` to enable block replies.
Verbose tool summaries are emitted at tool start (no debounce); Control UI
streams tool output via agent events when available.
More details: [Streaming + chunking](/concepts/streaming).

## Configuration (minimal)

At minimum, set:
- `agents.defaults.workspace`
- `whatsapp.allowFrom` (strongly recommended)

---

*Next: [Group Chats](/concepts/group-messages)* 🦞
