docs/concepts/memory.md, before:

---
summary: "How Clawdbot memory works (workspace files + automatic memory flush)"
read_when:
  - You want the memory file layout and workflow
  - You want to tune the automatic pre-compaction memory flush
---
# Memory

Clawdbot memory is **plain Markdown in the agent workspace**. The files are the
source of truth; the model only "remembers" what gets written to disk.

## Memory files (Markdown)

The default workspace layout uses two memory layers:

- `memory/YYYY-MM-DD.md`
  - Daily log (append-only).
  - Read today + yesterday at session start.
- `MEMORY.md` (optional)
  - Curated long-term memory.
  - **Only load in the main, private session** (never in group contexts).

These files live under the workspace (`agents.defaults.workspace`, default
`~/clawd`). See [Agent workspace](/concepts/agent-workspace) for the full layout.

## When to write memory

- Decisions, preferences, and durable facts go to `MEMORY.md`.
- Day-to-day notes and running context go to `memory/YYYY-MM-DD.md`.
- If someone says "remember this," write it down (do not keep it in RAM).

## Automatic memory flush (pre-compaction ping)

When a session is **close to auto-compaction**, Clawdbot triggers a **silent,
agentic turn** that reminds the model to write durable memory **before** the
context is compacted. The default prompts explicitly say the model *may reply*,
but usually `NO_REPLY` is the correct response so the user never sees this turn.

This is controlled by `agents.defaults.compaction.memoryFlush`:

```json5
{
  agents: {
    defaults: {
      compaction: {
        reserveTokensFloor: 20000,
        memoryFlush: {
          enabled: true,
          softThresholdTokens: 4000,
          systemPrompt: "Session nearing compaction. Store durable memories now.",
          prompt: "Write any lasting notes to memory/YYYY-MM-DD.md; reply with NO_REPLY if nothing to store."
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

Details:
- **Soft threshold**: flush triggers when the session token estimate crosses
  `contextWindow - reserveTokensFloor - softThresholdTokens`.
- **Silent** by default: prompts include `NO_REPLY` so nothing is delivered.
- **Two prompts**: a user prompt plus a system prompt append the reminder.
- **One flush per compaction cycle** (tracked in `sessions.json`).
- **Workspace must be writable**: if the session runs sandboxed with
  `workspaceAccess: "ro"` or `"none"`, the flush is skipped.

For the full compaction lifecycle, see
[Session management + compaction](/reference/session-management-compaction).

## Vector memory search

Clawdbot can build a small vector index over `MEMORY.md` and `memory/*.md` so
semantic queries can find related notes even when wording differs.

Defaults:
- Enabled by default.
- Watches memory files for changes (debounced).
- Uses remote embeddings (OpenAI) unless configured for local.
- Local mode uses node-llama-cpp and may require `pnpm approve-builds`.
- Uses sqlite-vec (when available) to accelerate vector search inside SQLite.

Remote embeddings **require** an API key for the embedding provider. By default
this is OpenAI (`OPENAI_API_KEY` or `models.providers.openai.apiKey`). Codex
OAuth only covers chat/completions and does **not** satisfy embeddings for
memory search. When using a custom OpenAI-compatible endpoint, set
`memorySearch.remote.apiKey` (and optional `memorySearch.remote.headers`).

If you want to use a **custom OpenAI-compatible endpoint** (like Gemini, OpenRouter, or a proxy),
you can use the `remote` configuration:

```json5
agents: {
  defaults: {
    memorySearch: {
      provider: "openai",
      model: "text-embedding-3-small",
      remote: {
        baseUrl: "https://generativelanguage.googleapis.com/v1beta/openai/",
        apiKey: "YOUR_GEMINI_API_KEY",
        headers: { "X-Custom-Header": "value" }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

If you don't want to set an API key, use `memorySearch.provider = "local"` or set
`memorySearch.fallback = "none"`.

Batch indexing (OpenAI only):
- Enabled by default for OpenAI embeddings. Set `agents.defaults.memorySearch.remote.batch.enabled = false` to disable.
- Default behavior waits for batch completion; tune `remote.batch.wait`, `remote.batch.pollIntervalMs`, and `remote.batch.timeoutMinutes` if needed.
- Batch mode currently applies only when `memorySearch.provider = "openai"` and uses your OpenAI API key.

Config example:

```json5
agents: {
  defaults: {
    memorySearch: {
      provider: "openai",
      model: "text-embedding-3-small",
      fallback: "openai",
      remote: {
        batch: { enabled: false }
      },
      sync: { watch: true }
    }
  }
}
```

Tools:
- `memory_search` — returns snippets with file + line ranges.
- `memory_get` — read memory file content by path.

Local mode:
- Set `agents.defaults.memorySearch.provider = "local"`.
- Provide `agents.defaults.memorySearch.local.modelPath` (GGUF or `hf:` URI).
- Optional: set `agents.defaults.memorySearch.fallback = "none"` to avoid remote fallback.

### How the memory tools work

- `memory_search` semantically searches Markdown chunks (~400 token target, 80-token overlap) from `MEMORY.md` + `memory/**/*.md`. It returns snippet text (capped ~700 chars), file path, line range, score, provider/model, and whether we fell back from local → remote embeddings. No full file payload is returned.
- `memory_get` reads a specific memory Markdown file (workspace-relative), optionally from a starting line and for N lines. Paths outside `MEMORY.md` / `memory/` are rejected.
- Both tools are enabled only when `memorySearch.enabled` resolves true for the agent.

### What gets indexed (and when)

- File type: Markdown only (`MEMORY.md`, `memory/**/*.md`).
- Index storage: per-agent SQLite at `~/.clawdbot/state/memory/<agentId>.sqlite` (configurable via `agents.defaults.memorySearch.store.path`, supports `{agentId}` token).
- Freshness: watcher on `MEMORY.md` + `memory/` marks the index dirty (debounce 1.5s). Sync runs on session start, on first search when dirty, and optionally on an interval. Reindex triggers when embedding model/provider or chunk sizes change.

### Session memory search (experimental)

You can optionally index **session transcripts** and surface them via `memory_search`.
This is gated behind an experimental flag.

```json5
agents: {
  defaults: {
    memorySearch: {
      experimental: { sessionMemory: true },
      sources: ["memory", "sessions"]
    }
  }
}
```

Notes:
- Session indexing is **opt-in** (off by default).
- Session updates are debounced and indexed lazily on the next `memory_search` (or manual `clawdbot memory index`).
- Results still include snippets only; `memory_get` remains limited to memory files.
- Session indexing is isolated per agent (only that agent’s session logs are indexed).
- Session logs live on disk (`~/.clawdbot/agents/<agentId>/sessions/*.jsonl`). Any process/user with filesystem access can read them, so treat disk access as the trust boundary. For stricter isolation, run agents under separate OS users or hosts.

### SQLite vector acceleration (sqlite-vec)

When the sqlite-vec extension is available, Clawdbot stores embeddings in a
SQLite virtual table (`vec0`) and performs vector distance queries in the
database. This keeps search fast without loading every embedding into JS.

Configuration (optional):

```json5
agents: {
  defaults: {
    memorySearch: {
      store: {
        vector: {
          enabled: true,
          extensionPath: "/path/to/sqlite-vec"
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

Notes:
- `enabled` defaults to true; when disabled, search falls back to in-process
  cosine similarity over stored embeddings.
- If the sqlite-vec extension is missing or fails to load, Clawdbot logs the
  error and continues with the JS fallback (no vector table).
- `extensionPath` overrides the bundled sqlite-vec path (useful for custom builds
  or non-standard install locations).

### Local embedding auto-download

- Default local embedding model: `hf:ggml-org/embeddinggemma-300M-GGUF/embeddinggemma-300M-Q8_0.gguf` (~0.6 GB).
- When `memorySearch.provider = "local"`, `node-llama-cpp` resolves `modelPath`; if the GGUF is missing it **auto-downloads** to the cache (or `local.modelCacheDir` if set), then loads it. Downloads resume on retry.
- Native build requirement: run `pnpm approve-builds`, pick `node-llama-cpp`, then `pnpm rebuild node-llama-cpp`.
- Fallback: if local setup fails and `memorySearch.fallback = "openai"`, we automatically switch to remote embeddings (`openai/text-embedding-3-small` unless overridden) and record the reason.

### Custom OpenAI-compatible endpoint example

```json5
agents: {
  defaults: {
    memorySearch: {
      provider: "openai",
      model: "text-embedding-3-small",
      remote: {
        baseUrl: "https://api.example.com/v1/",
        apiKey: "YOUR_REMOTE_API_KEY",
        headers: {
          "X-Organization": "org-id",
          "X-Project": "project-id"
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

Notes:
- `remote.*` takes precedence over `models.providers.openai.*`.
- `remote.headers` merge with OpenAI headers; remote wins on key conflicts. Omit `remote.headers` to use the OpenAI defaults.

Commit message:

docs: note model change reindex

docs/concepts/memory.md, after:

---
summary: "How Clawdbot memory works (workspace files + automatic memory flush)"
read_when:
  - You want the memory file layout and workflow
  - You want to tune the automatic pre-compaction memory flush
---
# Memory

Clawdbot memory is **plain Markdown in the agent workspace**. The files are the
source of truth; the model only "remembers" what gets written to disk.

## Memory files (Markdown)

The default workspace layout uses two memory layers:

- `memory/YYYY-MM-DD.md`
  - Daily log (append-only).
  - Read today + yesterday at session start.
- `MEMORY.md` (optional)
  - Curated long-term memory.
  - **Only load in the main, private session** (never in group contexts).

These files live under the workspace (`agents.defaults.workspace`, default
`~/clawd`). See [Agent workspace](/concepts/agent-workspace) for the full layout.

## When to write memory

- Decisions, preferences, and durable facts go to `MEMORY.md`.
- Day-to-day notes and running context go to `memory/YYYY-MM-DD.md`.
- If someone says "remember this," write it down (do not keep it in RAM).

## Automatic memory flush (pre-compaction ping)

When a session is **close to auto-compaction**, Clawdbot triggers a **silent,
agentic turn** that reminds the model to write durable memory **before** the
context is compacted. The default prompts explicitly say the model *may reply*,
but usually `NO_REPLY` is the correct response so the user never sees this turn.

This is controlled by `agents.defaults.compaction.memoryFlush`:

```json5
{
  agents: {
    defaults: {
      compaction: {
        reserveTokensFloor: 20000,
        memoryFlush: {
          enabled: true,
          softThresholdTokens: 4000,
          systemPrompt: "Session nearing compaction. Store durable memories now.",
          prompt: "Write any lasting notes to memory/YYYY-MM-DD.md; reply with NO_REPLY if nothing to store."
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

Details:
- **Soft threshold**: flush triggers when the session token estimate crosses
  `contextWindow - reserveTokensFloor - softThresholdTokens`.
- **Silent** by default: prompts include `NO_REPLY` so nothing is delivered.
- **Two prompts**: a user prompt plus a system prompt append the reminder.
- **One flush per compaction cycle** (tracked in `sessions.json`).
- **Workspace must be writable**: if the session runs sandboxed with
  `workspaceAccess: "ro"` or `"none"`, the flush is skipped.

For the full compaction lifecycle, see
[Session management + compaction](/reference/session-management-compaction).

## Vector memory search

Clawdbot can build a small vector index over `MEMORY.md` and `memory/*.md` so
semantic queries can find related notes even when wording differs.

Defaults:
- Enabled by default.
- Watches memory files for changes (debounced).
- Uses remote embeddings (OpenAI) unless configured for local.
- Local mode uses node-llama-cpp and may require `pnpm approve-builds`.
- Uses sqlite-vec (when available) to accelerate vector search inside SQLite.

Remote embeddings **require** an API key for the embedding provider. By default
this is OpenAI (`OPENAI_API_KEY` or `models.providers.openai.apiKey`). Codex
OAuth only covers chat/completions and does **not** satisfy embeddings for
memory search. When using a custom OpenAI-compatible endpoint, set
`memorySearch.remote.apiKey` (and optional `memorySearch.remote.headers`).

If you want to use a **custom OpenAI-compatible endpoint** (like Gemini, OpenRouter, or a proxy),
you can use the `remote` configuration:

```json5
agents: {
  defaults: {
    memorySearch: {
      provider: "openai",
      model: "text-embedding-3-small",
      remote: {
        baseUrl: "https://generativelanguage.googleapis.com/v1beta/openai/",
        apiKey: "YOUR_GEMINI_API_KEY",
        headers: { "X-Custom-Header": "value" }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

If you don't want to set an API key, use `memorySearch.provider = "local"` or set
`memorySearch.fallback = "none"`.

Batch indexing (OpenAI only):
- Enabled by default for OpenAI embeddings. Set `agents.defaults.memorySearch.remote.batch.enabled = false` to disable.
- Default behavior waits for batch completion; tune `remote.batch.wait`, `remote.batch.pollIntervalMs`, and `remote.batch.timeoutMinutes` if needed.
- Batch mode currently applies only when `memorySearch.provider = "openai"` and uses your OpenAI API key.

Config example:

```json5
agents: {
  defaults: {
    memorySearch: {
      provider: "openai",
      model: "text-embedding-3-small",
      fallback: "openai",
      remote: {
        batch: { enabled: false }
      },
      sync: { watch: true }
    }
  }
}
```

Tools:
- `memory_search` — returns snippets with file + line ranges.
- `memory_get` — read memory file content by path.

Local mode:
- Set `agents.defaults.memorySearch.provider = "local"`.
- Provide `agents.defaults.memorySearch.local.modelPath` (GGUF or `hf:` URI).
- Optional: set `agents.defaults.memorySearch.fallback = "none"` to avoid remote fallback.

### How the memory tools work

- `memory_search` semantically searches Markdown chunks (~400 token target, 80-token overlap) from `MEMORY.md` + `memory/**/*.md`. It returns snippet text (capped ~700 chars), file path, line range, score, provider/model, and whether we fell back from local → remote embeddings. No full file payload is returned.
- `memory_get` reads a specific memory Markdown file (workspace-relative), optionally from a starting line and for N lines. Paths outside `MEMORY.md` / `memory/` are rejected.
- Both tools are enabled only when `memorySearch.enabled` resolves true for the agent.

### What gets indexed (and when)

- File type: Markdown only (`MEMORY.md`, `memory/**/*.md`).
- Index storage: per-agent SQLite at `~/.clawdbot/state/memory/<agentId>.sqlite` (configurable via `agents.defaults.memorySearch.store.path`, supports `{agentId}` token).
- Freshness: watcher on `MEMORY.md` + `memory/` marks the index dirty (debounce 1.5s). Sync runs on session start, on first search when dirty, and optionally on an interval. Reindex triggers when embedding model/provider or chunk sizes change.
- Model changes: the index stores the embedding **model + provider + chunking params**. If any of those change, Clawdbot automatically resets and reindexes the entire store.

### Session memory search (experimental)

You can optionally index **session transcripts** and surface them via `memory_search`.
This is gated behind an experimental flag.

```json5
agents: {
  defaults: {
    memorySearch: {
      experimental: { sessionMemory: true },
      sources: ["memory", "sessions"]
    }
  }
}
```

Notes:
- Session indexing is **opt-in** (off by default).
- Session updates are debounced and indexed lazily on the next `memory_search` (or manual `clawdbot memory index`).
- Results still include snippets only; `memory_get` remains limited to memory files.
- Session indexing is isolated per agent (only that agent’s session logs are indexed).
- Session logs live on disk (`~/.clawdbot/agents/<agentId>/sessions/*.jsonl`). Any process/user with filesystem access can read them, so treat disk access as the trust boundary. For stricter isolation, run agents under separate OS users or hosts.

### SQLite vector acceleration (sqlite-vec)

When the sqlite-vec extension is available, Clawdbot stores embeddings in a
SQLite virtual table (`vec0`) and performs vector distance queries in the
database. This keeps search fast without loading every embedding into JS.

Configuration (optional):

```json5
agents: {
  defaults: {
    memorySearch: {
      store: {
        vector: {
          enabled: true,
          extensionPath: "/path/to/sqlite-vec"
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

Notes:
- `enabled` defaults to true; when disabled, search falls back to in-process
  cosine similarity over stored embeddings.
- If the sqlite-vec extension is missing or fails to load, Clawdbot logs the
  error and continues with the JS fallback (no vector table).
- `extensionPath` overrides the bundled sqlite-vec path (useful for custom builds
  or non-standard install locations).

### Local embedding auto-download

- Default local embedding model: `hf:ggml-org/embeddinggemma-300M-GGUF/embeddinggemma-300M-Q8_0.gguf` (~0.6 GB).
- When `memorySearch.provider = "local"`, `node-llama-cpp` resolves `modelPath`; if the GGUF is missing it **auto-downloads** to the cache (or `local.modelCacheDir` if set), then loads it. Downloads resume on retry.
- Native build requirement: run `pnpm approve-builds`, pick `node-llama-cpp`, then `pnpm rebuild node-llama-cpp`.
- Fallback: if local setup fails and `memorySearch.fallback = "openai"`, we automatically switch to remote embeddings (`openai/text-embedding-3-small` unless overridden) and record the reason.

### Custom OpenAI-compatible endpoint example

```json5
agents: {
  defaults: {
    memorySearch: {
      provider: "openai",
      model: "text-embedding-3-small",
      remote: {
        baseUrl: "https://api.example.com/v1/",
        apiKey: "YOUR_REMOTE_API_KEY",
        headers: {
          "X-Organization": "org-id",
          "X-Project": "project-id"
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

Notes:
- `remote.*` takes precedence over `models.providers.openai.*`.
- `remote.headers` merge with OpenAI headers; remote wins on key conflicts. Omit `remote.headers` to use the OpenAI defaults.
