docs/concepts/messages.md, before:

---
summary: "Message flow, sessions, queueing, and reasoning visibility"
read_when:
  - Explaining how inbound messages become replies
  - Clarifying sessions, queueing modes, or streaming behavior
  - Documenting reasoning visibility and usage implications
---
# Messages

This page ties together how Clawdbot handles inbound messages, sessions, queueing,
streaming, and reasoning visibility.

## Message flow (high level)

```
Inbound message
  -> routing/bindings -> session key
  -> queue (if a run is active)
  -> agent run (streaming + tools)
  -> outbound replies (channel limits + chunking)
```

Key knobs live in configuration:
- `messages.*` for prefixes, queueing, and group behavior.
- `agents.defaults.*` for block streaming and chunking defaults.
- Channel overrides (`channels.whatsapp.*`, `channels.telegram.*`, etc.) for caps and streaming toggles.

See [Configuration](/gateway/configuration) for full schema.

## Inbound dedupe

Channels can redeliver the same message after reconnects. Clawdbot keeps a
short-lived cache keyed by channel/account/peer/session/message id so duplicate
deliveries do not trigger another agent run.

## Inbound debouncing

Rapid consecutive messages from the **same sender** can be batched into a single
agent turn via `messages.inbound`. Debouncing is scoped per channel + conversation
and uses the most recent message for reply threading/IDs.

Config (global default + per-channel overrides):
```json5
{
  messages: {
    inbound: {
      debounceMs: 2000,
      byChannel: {
        whatsapp: 5000,
        slack: 1500,
        discord: 1500
      }
    }
  }
}
```

Notes:
- Debounce applies to **text-only** messages; media/attachments flush immediately.
- Control commands bypass debouncing so they remain standalone.

## Sessions and devices

Sessions are owned by the gateway, not by clients.
- Direct chats collapse into the agent main session key.
- Groups/channels get their own session keys.
- The session store and transcripts live on the gateway host.

Multiple devices/channels can map to the same session, but history is not fully
synced back to every client. Recommendation: use one primary device for long
conversations to avoid divergent context. The Control UI and TUI always show the
gateway-backed session transcript, so they are the source of truth.

Details: [Session management](/concepts/session).

## Inbound bodies and history context

Clawdbot separates the **prompt body** from the **command body**:
- `Body`: prompt text sent to the agent. This may include channel envelopes and
  optional history wrappers.
- `CommandBody`: raw user text for directive/command parsing.
- `RawBody`: legacy alias for `CommandBody` (kept for compatibility).

When a channel supplies history, it uses a shared wrapper:
- `[Chat messages since your last reply - for context]`
- `[Current message - respond to this]`

Directive stripping only applies to the **current message** section so history
remains intact. Channels that wrap history should set `CommandBody` (or
`RawBody`) to the original message text and keep `Body` as the combined prompt.
History buffers are configurable via `messages.groupChat.historyLimit` (global
default) and per-channel overrides like `channels.slack.historyLimit` or
`channels.telegram.accounts.<id>.historyLimit` (set `0` to disable).

## Queueing and followups

If a run is already active, inbound messages can be queued, steered into the
current run, or collected for a followup turn.

- Configure via `messages.queue` (and `messages.queue.byChannel`).
- Modes: `interrupt`, `steer`, `followup`, `collect`, plus backlog variants.

Details: [Queueing](/concepts/queue).

## Streaming, chunking, and batching

Block streaming sends partial replies as the model produces text blocks.
Chunking respects channel text limits and avoids splitting fenced code.

Key settings:
- `agents.defaults.blockStreamingDefault` (`on|off`, default off)
- `agents.defaults.blockStreamingBreak` (`text_end|message_end`)
- `agents.defaults.blockStreamingChunk` (`minChars|maxChars|breakPreference`)
- `agents.defaults.blockStreamingCoalesce` (idle-based batching)
- `agents.defaults.humanDelay` (human-like pause between block replies)
- Channel overrides: `*.blockStreaming` and `*.blockStreamingCoalesce` (non-Telegram channels require explicit `*.blockStreaming: true`)

Details: [Streaming + chunking](/concepts/streaming).

## Reasoning visibility and tokens

Clawdbot can expose or hide model reasoning:
- `/reasoning on|off|stream` controls visibility.
- Reasoning content still counts toward token usage when produced by the model.
- Telegram supports reasoning stream into the draft bubble.

Details: [Thinking + reasoning directives](/tools/thinking) and [Token use](/token-use).

## Prefixes, threading, and replies

Outbound message formatting is centralized in `messages`:
- `messages.responsePrefix` (outbound prefix) and `channels.whatsapp.messagePrefix` (WhatsApp inbound prefix)
- Reply threading via `replyToMode` and per-channel defaults

Details: [Configuration](/gateway/configuration#messages) and channel docs.

Commit message:

fix: scope history injection to pending-only

docs/concepts/messages.md, after:

---
summary: "Message flow, sessions, queueing, and reasoning visibility"
read_when:
  - Explaining how inbound messages become replies
  - Clarifying sessions, queueing modes, or streaming behavior
  - Documenting reasoning visibility and usage implications
---
# Messages

This page ties together how Clawdbot handles inbound messages, sessions, queueing,
streaming, and reasoning visibility.

## Message flow (high level)

```
Inbound message
  -> routing/bindings -> session key
  -> queue (if a run is active)
  -> agent run (streaming + tools)
  -> outbound replies (channel limits + chunking)
```

Key knobs live in configuration:
- `messages.*` for prefixes, queueing, and group behavior.
- `agents.defaults.*` for block streaming and chunking defaults.
- Channel overrides (`channels.whatsapp.*`, `channels.telegram.*`, etc.) for caps and streaming toggles.

See [Configuration](/gateway/configuration) for full schema.

## Inbound dedupe

Channels can redeliver the same message after reconnects. Clawdbot keeps a
short-lived cache keyed by channel/account/peer/session/message id so duplicate
deliveries do not trigger another agent run.

## Inbound debouncing

Rapid consecutive messages from the **same sender** can be batched into a single
agent turn via `messages.inbound`. Debouncing is scoped per channel + conversation
and uses the most recent message for reply threading/IDs.

Config (global default + per-channel overrides):
```json5
{
  messages: {
    inbound: {
      debounceMs: 2000,
      byChannel: {
        whatsapp: 5000,
        slack: 1500,
        discord: 1500
      }
    }
  }
}
```

Notes:
- Debounce applies to **text-only** messages; media/attachments flush immediately.
- Control commands bypass debouncing so they remain standalone.

## Sessions and devices

Sessions are owned by the gateway, not by clients.
- Direct chats collapse into the agent main session key.
- Groups/channels get their own session keys.
- The session store and transcripts live on the gateway host.

Multiple devices/channels can map to the same session, but history is not fully
synced back to every client. Recommendation: use one primary device for long
conversations to avoid divergent context. The Control UI and TUI always show the
gateway-backed session transcript, so they are the source of truth.

Details: [Session management](/concepts/session).

## Inbound bodies and history context

Clawdbot separates the **prompt body** from the **command body**:
- `Body`: prompt text sent to the agent. This may include channel envelopes and
  optional history wrappers.
- `CommandBody`: raw user text for directive/command parsing.
- `RawBody`: legacy alias for `CommandBody` (kept for compatibility).

When a channel supplies history, it uses a shared wrapper:
- `[Chat messages since your last reply - for context]`
- `[Current message - respond to this]`

History buffers are **pending-only**: they include group messages that did *not*
trigger a run (for example, mention-gated messages) and **exclude** messages
already in the session transcript.

Directive stripping only applies to the **current message** section so history
remains intact. Channels that wrap history should set `CommandBody` (or
`RawBody`) to the original message text and keep `Body` as the combined prompt.
History buffers are configurable via `messages.groupChat.historyLimit` (global
default) and per-channel overrides like `channels.slack.historyLimit` or
`channels.telegram.accounts.<id>.historyLimit` (set `0` to disable).

## Queueing and followups

If a run is already active, inbound messages can be queued, steered into the
current run, or collected for a followup turn.

- Configure via `messages.queue` (and `messages.queue.byChannel`).
- Modes: `interrupt`, `steer`, `followup`, `collect`, plus backlog variants.

Details: [Queueing](/concepts/queue).

## Streaming, chunking, and batching

Block streaming sends partial replies as the model produces text blocks.
Chunking respects channel text limits and avoids splitting fenced code.

Key settings:
- `agents.defaults.blockStreamingDefault` (`on|off`, default off)
- `agents.defaults.blockStreamingBreak` (`text_end|message_end`)
- `agents.defaults.blockStreamingChunk` (`minChars|maxChars|breakPreference`)
- `agents.defaults.blockStreamingCoalesce` (idle-based batching)
- `agents.defaults.humanDelay` (human-like pause between block replies)
- Channel overrides: `*.blockStreaming` and `*.blockStreamingCoalesce` (non-Telegram channels require explicit `*.blockStreaming: true`)

Details: [Streaming + chunking](/concepts/streaming).

## Reasoning visibility and tokens

Clawdbot can expose or hide model reasoning:
- `/reasoning on|off|stream` controls visibility.
- Reasoning content still counts toward token usage when produced by the model.
- Telegram supports reasoning stream into the draft bubble.

Details: [Thinking + reasoning directives](/tools/thinking) and [Token use](/token-use).

## Prefixes, threading, and replies

Outbound message formatting is centralized in `messages`:
- `messages.responsePrefix` (outbound prefix) and `channels.whatsapp.messagePrefix` (WhatsApp inbound prefix)
- Reply threading via `replyToMode` and per-channel defaults

Details: [Configuration](/gateway/configuration#messages) and channel docs.
