docs/concepts/model-providers.md, before:

---
summary: "Model provider overview with example configs + CLI flows"
read_when:
  - You need a provider-by-provider model setup reference
  - You want example configs or CLI onboarding commands for model providers
---
# Model providers

This page covers **LLM/model providers** (not chat providers like WhatsApp/Telegram).
For model selection rules, see [/concepts/models](/concepts/models).

## Quick rules

- Model refs use `provider/model` (example: `opencode/claude-opus-4-5`).
- If you set `agents.defaults.models`, it becomes the allowlist.
- CLI helpers: `clawdbot onboard`, `clawdbot models list`, `clawdbot models set <provider/model>`.

## Built-in providers (pi-ai catalog)

Clawdbot ships with the pi‑ai catalog. These providers require **no**
`models.providers` config; just set auth + pick a model.

### OpenAI

- Provider: `openai`
- Auth: `OPENAI_API_KEY`
- Example model: `openai/gpt-5.2`
- CLI: `clawdbot onboard --auth-choice openai-api-key`

```json5
{
  agents: { defaults: { model: { primary: "openai/gpt-5.2" } } }
}
```

### Anthropic

- Provider: `anthropic`
- Auth: `ANTHROPIC_API_KEY` or `claude setup-token`
- Example model: `anthropic/claude-opus-4-5`
- CLI: `clawdbot onboard --auth-choice setup-token`

```json5
{
  agents: { defaults: { model: { primary: "anthropic/claude-opus-4-5" } } }
}
```

### OpenAI Code (Codex)

- Provider: `openai-codex`
- Auth: OAuth or Codex CLI (`~/.codex/auth.json`)
- Example model: `openai-codex/gpt-5.2`
- CLI: `clawdbot onboard --auth-choice openai-codex` or `codex-cli`

```json5
{
  agents: { defaults: { model: { primary: "openai-codex/gpt-5.2" } } }
}
```

### OpenCode Zen

- Provider: `opencode`
- Auth: `OPENCODE_API_KEY` (or `OPENCODE_ZEN_API_KEY`)
- Example model: `opencode/claude-opus-4-5`
- CLI: `clawdbot onboard --auth-choice opencode-zen`

```json5
{
  agents: { defaults: { model: { primary: "opencode/claude-opus-4-5" } } }
}
```

### Google Gemini (API key)

- Provider: `google`
- Auth: `GEMINI_API_KEY`
- Example model: `google/gemini-3-pro`
- CLI: `clawdbot onboard --auth-choice gemini-api-key`

### Google Vertex / Antigravity / Gemini CLI

- Providers: `google-vertex`, `google-antigravity`, `google-gemini-cli`
- Auth: Vertex uses gcloud ADC; Antigravity/Gemini CLI use their respective auth flows
- CLI: `clawdbot onboard --auth-choice antigravity` (others via interactive wizard)

### Z.AI (GLM)

- Provider: `zai`
- Auth: `ZAI_API_KEY`
- Example model: `zai/glm-4.7`
- CLI: `clawdbot onboard --auth-choice zai-api-key`
  - Aliases: `z.ai/*` and `z-ai/*` normalize to `zai/*`

### Other built-in providers

- OpenRouter: `openrouter` (`OPENROUTER_API_KEY`)
- Example model: `openrouter/anthropic/claude-sonnet-4-5`
- xAI: `xai` (`XAI_API_KEY`)
- Groq: `groq` (`GROQ_API_KEY`)
- Cerebras: `cerebras` (`CEREBRAS_API_KEY`)
- Mistral: `mistral` (`MISTRAL_API_KEY`)
- GitHub Copilot: `github-copilot` (`COPILOT_GITHUB_TOKEN` / `GH_TOKEN` / `GITHUB_TOKEN`)

## Providers via `models.providers` (custom/base URL)

Use `models.providers` (or `models.json`) to add **custom** providers or
OpenAI/Anthropic‑compatible proxies.

### MiniMax

MiniMax is configured via `models.providers` because it uses custom endpoints:

- MiniMax (Anthropic‑compatible): `--auth-choice minimax-api`
- Auth: `MINIMAX_API_KEY`

See [/providers/minimax](/providers/minimax) for setup details, model options, and config snippets.

### Local proxies (LM Studio, vLLM, LiteLLM, etc.)

Example (OpenAI‑compatible):

```json5
{
  agents: {
    defaults: {
      model: { primary: "lmstudio/minimax-m2.1-gs32" },
      models: { "lmstudio/minimax-m2.1-gs32": { alias: "Minimax" } }
    }
  },
  models: {
    providers: {
      lmstudio: {
        baseUrl: "http://localhost:1234/v1",
        apiKey: "LMSTUDIO_KEY",
        api: "openai-completions",
        models: [
          {
            id: "minimax-m2.1-gs32",
            name: "MiniMax M2.1",
            reasoning: false,
            input: ["text"],
            cost: { input: 0, output: 0, cacheRead: 0, cacheWrite: 0 },
            contextWindow: 200000,
            maxTokens: 8192
          }
        ]
      }
    }
  }
}
```

## CLI examples

```bash
clawdbot onboard --auth-choice opencode-zen
clawdbot models set opencode/claude-opus-4-5
clawdbot models list
```

See also: [/gateway/configuration](/gateway/configuration) for full configuration examples.

Commit message:

docs: expand minimax + cerebras setup

docs/concepts/model-providers.md, after:

---
summary: "Model provider overview with example configs + CLI flows"
read_when:
  - You need a provider-by-provider model setup reference
  - You want example configs or CLI onboarding commands for model providers
---
# Model providers

This page covers **LLM/model providers** (not chat providers like WhatsApp/Telegram).
For model selection rules, see [/concepts/models](/concepts/models).

## Quick rules

- Model refs use `provider/model` (example: `opencode/claude-opus-4-5`).
- If you set `agents.defaults.models`, it becomes the allowlist.
- CLI helpers: `clawdbot onboard`, `clawdbot models list`, `clawdbot models set <provider/model>`.

## Built-in providers (pi-ai catalog)

Clawdbot ships with the pi‑ai catalog. These providers require **no**
`models.providers` config; just set auth + pick a model.

### OpenAI

- Provider: `openai`
- Auth: `OPENAI_API_KEY`
- Example model: `openai/gpt-5.2`
- CLI: `clawdbot onboard --auth-choice openai-api-key`

```json5
{
  agents: { defaults: { model: { primary: "openai/gpt-5.2" } } }
}
```

### Anthropic

- Provider: `anthropic`
- Auth: `ANTHROPIC_API_KEY` or `claude setup-token`
- Example model: `anthropic/claude-opus-4-5`
- CLI: `clawdbot onboard --auth-choice setup-token`

```json5
{
  agents: { defaults: { model: { primary: "anthropic/claude-opus-4-5" } } }
}
```

### OpenAI Code (Codex)

- Provider: `openai-codex`
- Auth: OAuth or Codex CLI (`~/.codex/auth.json`)
- Example model: `openai-codex/gpt-5.2`
- CLI: `clawdbot onboard --auth-choice openai-codex` or `codex-cli`

```json5
{
  agents: { defaults: { model: { primary: "openai-codex/gpt-5.2" } } }
}
```

### OpenCode Zen

- Provider: `opencode`
- Auth: `OPENCODE_API_KEY` (or `OPENCODE_ZEN_API_KEY`)
- Example model: `opencode/claude-opus-4-5`
- CLI: `clawdbot onboard --auth-choice opencode-zen`

```json5
{
  agents: { defaults: { model: { primary: "opencode/claude-opus-4-5" } } }
}
```

### Google Gemini (API key)

- Provider: `google`
- Auth: `GEMINI_API_KEY`
- Example model: `google/gemini-3-pro`
- CLI: `clawdbot onboard --auth-choice gemini-api-key`

### Google Vertex / Antigravity / Gemini CLI

- Providers: `google-vertex`, `google-antigravity`, `google-gemini-cli`
- Auth: Vertex uses gcloud ADC; Antigravity/Gemini CLI use their respective auth flows
- CLI: `clawdbot onboard --auth-choice antigravity` (others via interactive wizard)

### Z.AI (GLM)

- Provider: `zai`
- Auth: `ZAI_API_KEY`
- Example model: `zai/glm-4.7`
- CLI: `clawdbot onboard --auth-choice zai-api-key`
  - Aliases: `z.ai/*` and `z-ai/*` normalize to `zai/*`

### Other built-in providers

- OpenRouter: `openrouter` (`OPENROUTER_API_KEY`)
- Example model: `openrouter/anthropic/claude-sonnet-4-5`
- xAI: `xai` (`XAI_API_KEY`)
- Groq: `groq` (`GROQ_API_KEY`)
- Cerebras: `cerebras` (`CEREBRAS_API_KEY`)
  - GLM models on Cerebras use ids `zai-glm-4.7` and `zai-glm-4.6`.
  - OpenAI-compatible base URL: `https://api.cerebras.ai/v1`.
- Mistral: `mistral` (`MISTRAL_API_KEY`)
- GitHub Copilot: `github-copilot` (`COPILOT_GITHUB_TOKEN` / `GH_TOKEN` / `GITHUB_TOKEN`)

## Providers via `models.providers` (custom/base URL)

Use `models.providers` (or `models.json`) to add **custom** providers or
OpenAI/Anthropic‑compatible proxies.

### MiniMax

MiniMax is configured via `models.providers` because it uses custom endpoints:

- MiniMax (Anthropic‑compatible): `--auth-choice minimax-api`
- Auth: `MINIMAX_API_KEY`

See [/providers/minimax](/providers/minimax) for setup details, model options, and config snippets.

### Local proxies (LM Studio, vLLM, LiteLLM, etc.)

Example (OpenAI‑compatible):

```json5
{
  agents: {
    defaults: {
      model: { primary: "lmstudio/minimax-m2.1-gs32" },
      models: { "lmstudio/minimax-m2.1-gs32": { alias: "Minimax" } }
    }
  },
  models: {
    providers: {
      lmstudio: {
        baseUrl: "http://localhost:1234/v1",
        apiKey: "LMSTUDIO_KEY",
        api: "openai-completions",
        models: [
          {
            id: "minimax-m2.1-gs32",
            name: "MiniMax M2.1",
            reasoning: false,
            input: ["text"],
            cost: { input: 0, output: 0, cacheRead: 0, cacheWrite: 0 },
            contextWindow: 200000,
            maxTokens: 8192
          }
        ]
      }
    }
  }
}
```

## CLI examples

```bash
clawdbot onboard --auth-choice opencode-zen
clawdbot models set opencode/claude-opus-4-5
clawdbot models list
```

See also: [/gateway/configuration](/gateway/configuration) for full configuration examples.
