docs/concepts/models.md, before:

---
summary: "Models CLI: list, set, aliases, fallbacks, scan, status"
read_when:
  - Adding or modifying models CLI (models list/set/scan/aliases/fallbacks)
  - Changing model fallback behavior or selection UX
  - Updating model scan probes (tools/images)
---
# Models CLI

See [/concepts/model-failover](/concepts/model-failover) for auth profile
rotation, cooldowns, and how that interacts with fallbacks.
Quick provider overview + examples: [/concepts/model-providers](/concepts/model-providers).

## How model selection works

Clawdbot selects models in this order:

1) **Primary** model (`agents.defaults.model.primary` or `agents.defaults.model`).
2) **Fallbacks** in `agents.defaults.model.fallbacks` (in order).
3) **Provider auth failover** happens inside a provider before moving to the
   next model.

Related:
- `agents.defaults.models` is the allowlist/catalog of models Clawdbot can use (plus aliases).
- `agents.defaults.imageModel` is used **only when** the primary model can’t accept images.
- Per-agent defaults can override `agents.defaults.model` via `agents.list[].model` plus bindings (see [/concepts/multi-agent](/concepts/multi-agent)).

## Quick model picks (anecdotal)

- **GLM**: a bit better for coding/tool calling.
- **MiniMax**: better for writing and vibes.

## Setup wizard (recommended)

If you don’t want to hand-edit config, run the onboarding wizard:

```bash
clawdbot onboard
```

It can set up model + auth for common providers, including **OpenAI Code (Codex)
subscription** (OAuth) and **Anthropic** (API key recommended; `claude
setup-token` also supported).

## Config keys (overview)

- `agents.defaults.model.primary` and `agents.defaults.model.fallbacks`
- `agents.defaults.imageModel.primary` and `agents.defaults.imageModel.fallbacks`
- `agents.defaults.models` (allowlist + aliases + provider params)
- `models.providers` (custom providers written into `models.json`)

Model refs are normalized to lowercase. Provider aliases like `z.ai/*` normalize
to `zai/*`.

Provider configuration examples (including OpenCode Zen) live in
[/gateway/configuration](/gateway/configuration#opencode-zen-multi-model-proxy).

## “Model is not allowed” (and why replies stop)

If `agents.defaults.models` is set, it becomes the **allowlist** for `/model` and for
session overrides. When a user selects a model that isn’t in that allowlist,
Clawdbot returns:

```
Model "provider/model" is not allowed. Use /model to list available models.
```

This happens **before** a normal reply is generated, so the message can feel
like it “didn’t respond.” The fix is to either:

- Add the model to `agents.defaults.models`, or
- Clear the allowlist (remove `agents.defaults.models`), or
- Pick a model from `/model list`.

Example allowlist config:

```json5
{
  agent: {
    model: { primary: "anthropic/claude-sonnet-4-5" },
    models: {
      "anthropic/claude-sonnet-4-5": { alias: "Sonnet" },
      "anthropic/claude-opus-4-5": { alias: "Opus" }
    }
  }
}
```

## Switching models in chat (`/model`)

You can switch models for the current session without restarting:

```
/model
/model list
/model 3
/model openai/gpt-5.2
/model status
```

Notes:
- `/model` (and `/model list`) is a compact, numbered picker (model family + available providers).
- `/model <#>` selects from that picker.
- `/model status` is the detailed view (auth candidates and, when configured, provider endpoint `baseUrl` + `api` mode).
- Model refs are parsed by splitting on the **first** `/`. Use `provider/model` when typing `/model <ref>`.
- If the model ID itself contains `/` (OpenRouter-style), you must include the provider prefix (example: `/model openrouter/moonshotai/kimi-k2`).
- If you omit the provider, Clawdbot treats the input as an alias or a model for the **default provider** (only works when there is no `/` in the model ID).

Full command behavior/config: [Slash commands](/tools/slash-commands).

## CLI commands

```bash
clawdbot models list
clawdbot models status
clawdbot models set <provider/model>
clawdbot models set-image <provider/model>

clawdbot models aliases list
clawdbot models aliases add <alias> <provider/model>
clawdbot models aliases remove <alias>

clawdbot models fallbacks list
clawdbot models fallbacks add <provider/model>
clawdbot models fallbacks remove <provider/model>
clawdbot models fallbacks clear

clawdbot models image-fallbacks list
clawdbot models image-fallbacks add <provider/model>
clawdbot models image-fallbacks remove <provider/model>
clawdbot models image-fallbacks clear
```

`clawdbot models` (no subcommand) is a shortcut for `models status`.

### `models list`

Shows configured models by default. Useful flags:

- `--all`: full catalog
- `--local`: local providers only
- `--provider <name>`: filter by provider
- `--plain`: one model per line
- `--json`: machine‑readable output

### `models status`

Shows the resolved primary model, fallbacks, image model, and an auth overview
of configured providers. It also surfaces OAuth expiry status for profiles found
in the auth store (warns within 24h by default). `--plain` prints only the
resolved primary model.
OAuth status is always shown (and included in `--json` output). If a configured
provider has no credentials, `models status` prints a **Missing auth** section.
JSON includes `auth.oauth` (warn window + profiles) and `auth.providers`
(effective auth per provider).
Use `--check` for automation (exit `1` when missing/expired, `2` when expiring).

Preferred Anthropic auth is the Claude Code CLI setup-token (run anywhere; paste on the gateway host if needed):

```bash
claude setup-token
clawdbot models status
```

## Scanning (OpenRouter free models)

`clawdbot models scan` inspects OpenRouter’s **free model catalog** and can
optionally probe models for tool and image support.

Key flags:

- `--no-probe`: skip live probes (metadata only)
- `--min-params <b>`: minimum parameter size (billions)
- `--max-age-days <days>`: skip older models
- `--provider <name>`: provider prefix filter
- `--max-candidates <n>`: fallback list size
- `--set-default`: set `agents.defaults.model.primary` to the first selection
- `--set-image`: set `agents.defaults.imageModel.primary` to the first image selection

Probing requires an OpenRouter API key (from auth profiles or
`OPENROUTER_API_KEY`). Without a key, use `--no-probe` to list candidates only.

Scan results are ranked by:
1) Image support
2) Tool latency
3) Context size
4) Parameter count

Input
- OpenRouter `/models` list (filter `:free`)
- Requires OpenRouter API key from auth profiles or `OPENROUTER_API_KEY` (see [/environment](/environment))
- Optional filters: `--max-age-days`, `--min-params`, `--provider`, `--max-candidates`
- Probe controls: `--timeout`, `--concurrency`

When run in a TTY, you can select fallbacks interactively. In non‑interactive
mode, pass `--yes` to accept defaults.

## Models registry (`models.json`)

Custom providers in `models.providers` are written into `models.json` under the
agent directory (default `~/.clawdbot/agents/<agentId>/models.json`). This file
is merged by default unless `models.mode` is set to `replace`.

Commit message:

refactor: rename clawdbot to moltbot with legacy compat

docs/concepts/models.md, after:

---
summary: "Models CLI: list, set, aliases, fallbacks, scan, status"
read_when:
  - Adding or modifying models CLI (models list/set/scan/aliases/fallbacks)
  - Changing model fallback behavior or selection UX
  - Updating model scan probes (tools/images)
---
# Models CLI

See [/concepts/model-failover](/concepts/model-failover) for auth profile
rotation, cooldowns, and how that interacts with fallbacks.
Quick provider overview + examples: [/concepts/model-providers](/concepts/model-providers).

## How model selection works

Moltbot selects models in this order:

1) **Primary** model (`agents.defaults.model.primary` or `agents.defaults.model`).
2) **Fallbacks** in `agents.defaults.model.fallbacks` (in order).
3) **Provider auth failover** happens inside a provider before moving to the
   next model.

Related:
- `agents.defaults.models` is the allowlist/catalog of models Moltbot can use (plus aliases).
- `agents.defaults.imageModel` is used **only when** the primary model can’t accept images.
- Per-agent defaults can override `agents.defaults.model` via `agents.list[].model` plus bindings (see [/concepts/multi-agent](/concepts/multi-agent)).

## Quick model picks (anecdotal)

- **GLM**: a bit better for coding/tool calling.
- **MiniMax**: better for writing and vibes.

## Setup wizard (recommended)

If you don’t want to hand-edit config, run the onboarding wizard:

```bash
moltbot onboard
```

It can set up model + auth for common providers, including **OpenAI Code (Codex)
subscription** (OAuth) and **Anthropic** (API key recommended; `claude
setup-token` also supported).

## Config keys (overview)

- `agents.defaults.model.primary` and `agents.defaults.model.fallbacks`
- `agents.defaults.imageModel.primary` and `agents.defaults.imageModel.fallbacks`
- `agents.defaults.models` (allowlist + aliases + provider params)
- `models.providers` (custom providers written into `models.json`)

Model refs are normalized to lowercase. Provider aliases like `z.ai/*` normalize
to `zai/*`.

Provider configuration examples (including OpenCode Zen) live in
[/gateway/configuration](/gateway/configuration#opencode-zen-multi-model-proxy).

## “Model is not allowed” (and why replies stop)

If `agents.defaults.models` is set, it becomes the **allowlist** for `/model` and for
session overrides. When a user selects a model that isn’t in that allowlist,
Moltbot returns:

```
Model "provider/model" is not allowed. Use /model to list available models.
```

This happens **before** a normal reply is generated, so the message can feel
like it “didn’t respond.” The fix is to either:

- Add the model to `agents.defaults.models`, or
- Clear the allowlist (remove `agents.defaults.models`), or
- Pick a model from `/model list`.

Example allowlist config:

```json5
{
  agent: {
    model: { primary: "anthropic/claude-sonnet-4-5" },
    models: {
      "anthropic/claude-sonnet-4-5": { alias: "Sonnet" },
      "anthropic/claude-opus-4-5": { alias: "Opus" }
    }
  }
}
```

## Switching models in chat (`/model`)

You can switch models for the current session without restarting:

```
/model
/model list
/model 3
/model openai/gpt-5.2
/model status
```

Notes:
- `/model` (and `/model list`) is a compact, numbered picker (model family + available providers).
- `/model <#>` selects from that picker.
- `/model status` is the detailed view (auth candidates and, when configured, provider endpoint `baseUrl` + `api` mode).
- Model refs are parsed by splitting on the **first** `/`. Use `provider/model` when typing `/model <ref>`.
- If the model ID itself contains `/` (OpenRouter-style), you must include the provider prefix (example: `/model openrouter/moonshotai/kimi-k2`).
- If you omit the provider, Moltbot treats the input as an alias or a model for the **default provider** (only works when there is no `/` in the model ID).

Full command behavior/config: [Slash commands](/tools/slash-commands).

## CLI commands

```bash
moltbot models list
moltbot models status
moltbot models set <provider/model>
moltbot models set-image <provider/model>

moltbot models aliases list
moltbot models aliases add <alias> <provider/model>
moltbot models aliases remove <alias>

moltbot models fallbacks list
moltbot models fallbacks add <provider/model>
moltbot models fallbacks remove <provider/model>
moltbot models fallbacks clear

moltbot models image-fallbacks list
moltbot models image-fallbacks add <provider/model>
moltbot models image-fallbacks remove <provider/model>
moltbot models image-fallbacks clear
```

`moltbot models` (no subcommand) is a shortcut for `models status`.

### `models list`

Shows configured models by default. Useful flags:

- `--all`: full catalog
- `--local`: local providers only
- `--provider <name>`: filter by provider
- `--plain`: one model per line
- `--json`: machine‑readable output

### `models status`

Shows the resolved primary model, fallbacks, image model, and an auth overview
of configured providers. It also surfaces OAuth expiry status for profiles found
in the auth store (warns within 24h by default). `--plain` prints only the
resolved primary model.
OAuth status is always shown (and included in `--json` output). If a configured
provider has no credentials, `models status` prints a **Missing auth** section.
JSON includes `auth.oauth` (warn window + profiles) and `auth.providers`
(effective auth per provider).
Use `--check` for automation (exit `1` when missing/expired, `2` when expiring).

Preferred Anthropic auth is the Claude Code CLI setup-token (run anywhere; paste on the gateway host if needed):

```bash
claude setup-token
moltbot models status
```

## Scanning (OpenRouter free models)

`moltbot models scan` inspects OpenRouter’s **free model catalog** and can
optionally probe models for tool and image support.

Key flags:

- `--no-probe`: skip live probes (metadata only)
- `--min-params <b>`: minimum parameter size (billions)
- `--max-age-days <days>`: skip older models
- `--provider <name>`: provider prefix filter
- `--max-candidates <n>`: fallback list size
- `--set-default`: set `agents.defaults.model.primary` to the first selection
- `--set-image`: set `agents.defaults.imageModel.primary` to the first image selection

Probing requires an OpenRouter API key (from auth profiles or
`OPENROUTER_API_KEY`). Without a key, use `--no-probe` to list candidates only.

Scan results are ranked by:
1) Image support
2) Tool latency
3) Context size
4) Parameter count

Input
- OpenRouter `/models` list (filter `:free`)
- Requires OpenRouter API key from auth profiles or `OPENROUTER_API_KEY` (see [/environment](/environment))
- Optional filters: `--max-age-days`, `--min-params`, `--provider`, `--max-candidates`
- Probe controls: `--timeout`, `--concurrency`

When run in a TTY, you can select fallbacks interactively. In non‑interactive
mode, pass `--yes` to accept defaults.

## Models registry (`models.json`)

Custom providers in `models.providers` are written into `models.json` under the
agent directory (default `~/.clawdbot/agents/<agentId>/models.json`). This file
is merged by default unless `models.mode` is set to `replace`.
