docs/cli/approvals.md, before:

---
summary: "CLI reference for `clawdbot approvals` (exec approvals for gateway or node hosts)"
read_when:
  - You want to edit exec approvals from the CLI
  - You need to manage allowlists on gateway or node hosts
---

# `clawdbot approvals`

Manage exec approvals for the **gateway host** or a **node host**.
By default, commands target the gateway. Use `--node` to edit a node’s approvals.

Related:
- Exec approvals: [Exec approvals](/tools/exec-approvals)
- Nodes: [Nodes](/nodes)

## Common commands

```bash
clawdbot approvals get
clawdbot approvals get --node <id|name|ip>
```

## Replace approvals from a file

```bash
clawdbot approvals set --file ./exec-approvals.json
clawdbot approvals set --node <id|name|ip> --file ./exec-approvals.json
```

## Allowlist helpers

```bash
clawdbot approvals allowlist add "~/Projects/**/bin/rg"
clawdbot approvals allowlist add --agent main --node <id|name|ip> "/usr/bin/uptime"

clawdbot approvals allowlist remove "~/Projects/**/bin/rg"
```

## Notes

- `--node` uses the same resolver as `clawdbot nodes` (id, name, ip, or id prefix).
- The node host must advertise `system.execApprovals.get/set` (macOS app or headless node host).
- Approvals files are stored per host at `~/.clawdbot/exec-approvals.json`.

Commit message:

feat: improve exec approvals defaults and wildcard

docs/cli/approvals.md, after:

---
summary: "CLI reference for `clawdbot approvals` (exec approvals for gateway or node hosts)"
read_when:
  - You want to edit exec approvals from the CLI
  - You need to manage allowlists on gateway or node hosts
---

# `clawdbot approvals`

Manage exec approvals for the **local host**, **gateway host**, or a **node host**.
By default, commands target the local approvals file on disk. Use `--gateway` to target the gateway, or `--node` to target a specific node.

Related:
- Exec approvals: [Exec approvals](/tools/exec-approvals)
- Nodes: [Nodes](/nodes)

## Common commands

```bash
clawdbot approvals get
clawdbot approvals get --node <id|name|ip>
clawdbot approvals get --gateway
```

## Replace approvals from a file

```bash
clawdbot approvals set --file ./exec-approvals.json
clawdbot approvals set --node <id|name|ip> --file ./exec-approvals.json
clawdbot approvals set --gateway --file ./exec-approvals.json
```

## Allowlist helpers

```bash
clawdbot approvals allowlist add "~/Projects/**/bin/rg"
clawdbot approvals allowlist add --agent main --node <id|name|ip> "/usr/bin/uptime"
clawdbot approvals allowlist add --agent "*" "/usr/bin/uname"

clawdbot approvals allowlist remove "~/Projects/**/bin/rg"
```

## Notes

- `--node` uses the same resolver as `clawdbot nodes` (id, name, ip, or id prefix).
- `--agent` defaults to `"*"`, which applies to all agents.
- The node host must advertise `system.execApprovals.get/set` (macOS app or headless node host).
- Approvals files are stored per host at `~/.clawdbot/exec-approvals.json`.
