docs/cli/gateway.md, before:

---
summary: "OpenClaw Gateway CLI (`openclaw gateway`) — run, query, and discover gateways"
read_when:
  - Running the Gateway from the CLI (dev or servers)
  - Debugging Gateway auth, bind modes, and connectivity
  - Discovering gateways via Bonjour (LAN + tailnet)
title: "gateway"
---

# Gateway CLI

The Gateway is OpenClaw’s WebSocket server (channels, nodes, sessions, hooks).

Subcommands in this page live under `openclaw gateway …`.

Related docs:

- [/gateway/bonjour](/gateway/bonjour)
- [/gateway/discovery](/gateway/discovery)
- [/gateway/configuration](/gateway/configuration)

## Run the Gateway

Run a local Gateway process:

```bash
openclaw gateway
```

Foreground alias:

```bash
openclaw gateway run
```

Notes:

- By default, the Gateway refuses to start unless `gateway.mode=local` is set in `~/.openclaw/openclaw.json`. Use `--allow-unconfigured` for ad-hoc/dev runs.
- Binding beyond loopback without auth is blocked (safety guardrail).
- `SIGUSR1` triggers an in-process restart when authorized (enable `commands.restart` or use the gateway tool/config apply/update).
- `SIGINT`/`SIGTERM` handlers stop the gateway process, but they don’t restore any custom terminal state. If you wrap the CLI with a TUI or raw-mode input, restore the terminal before exit.

### Options

- `--port <port>`: WebSocket port (default comes from config/env; usually `18789`).
- `--bind <loopback|lan|tailnet|auto|custom>`: listener bind mode.
- `--auth <token|password>`: auth mode override.
- `--token <token>`: token override (also sets `OPENCLAW_GATEWAY_TOKEN` for the process).
- `--password <password>`: password override (also sets `OPENCLAW_GATEWAY_PASSWORD` for the process).
- `--tailscale <off|serve|funnel>`: expose the Gateway via Tailscale.
- `--tailscale-reset-on-exit`: reset Tailscale serve/funnel config on shutdown.
- `--allow-unconfigured`: allow gateway start without `gateway.mode=local` in config.
- `--dev`: create a dev config + workspace if missing (skips BOOTSTRAP.md).
- `--reset`: reset dev config + credentials + sessions + workspace (requires `--dev`).
- `--force`: kill any existing listener on the selected port before starting.
- `--verbose`: verbose logs.
- `--claude-cli-logs`: only show claude-cli logs in the console (and enable its stdout/stderr).
- `--ws-log <auto|full|compact>`: websocket log style (default `auto`).
- `--compact`: alias for `--ws-log compact`.
- `--raw-stream`: log raw model stream events to jsonl.
- `--raw-stream-path <path>`: raw stream jsonl path.

## Query a running Gateway

All query commands use WebSocket RPC.

Output modes:

- Default: human-readable (colored in TTY).
- `--json`: machine-readable JSON (no styling/spinner).
- `--no-color` (or `NO_COLOR=1`): disable ANSI while keeping human layout.

Shared options (where supported):

- `--url <url>`: Gateway WebSocket URL.
- `--token <token>`: Gateway token.
- `--password <password>`: Gateway password.
- `--timeout <ms>`: timeout/budget (varies per command).
- `--expect-final`: wait for a “final” response (agent calls).

### `gateway health`

```bash
openclaw gateway health --url ws://127.0.0.1:18789
```

### `gateway status`

`gateway status` shows the Gateway service (launchd/systemd/schtasks) plus an optional RPC probe.

```bash
openclaw gateway status
openclaw gateway status --json
```

Options:

- `--url <url>`: override the probe URL.
- `--token <token>`: token auth for the probe.
- `--password <password>`: password auth for the probe.
- `--timeout <ms>`: probe timeout (default `10000`).
- `--no-probe`: skip the RPC probe (service-only view).
- `--deep`: scan system-level services too.

### `gateway probe`

`gateway probe` is the “debug everything” command. It always probes:

- your configured remote gateway (if set), and
- localhost (loopback) **even if remote is configured**.

If multiple gateways are reachable, it prints all of them. Multiple gateways are supported when you use isolated profiles/ports (e.g., a rescue bot), but most installs still run a single gateway.

```bash
openclaw gateway probe
openclaw gateway probe --json
```

#### Remote over SSH (Mac app parity)

The macOS app “Remote over SSH” mode uses a local port-forward so the remote gateway (which may be bound to loopback only) becomes reachable at `ws://127.0.0.1:<port>`.

CLI equivalent:

```bash
openclaw gateway probe --ssh user@gateway-host
```

Options:

- `--ssh <target>`: `user@host` or `user@host:port` (port defaults to `22`).
- `--ssh-identity <path>`: identity file.
- `--ssh-auto`: pick the first discovered gateway host as SSH target (LAN/WAB only).

Config (optional, used as defaults):

- `gateway.remote.sshTarget`
- `gateway.remote.sshIdentity`

### `gateway call <method>`

Low-level RPC helper.

```bash
openclaw gateway call status
openclaw gateway call logs.tail --params '{"sinceMs": 60000}'
```

## Manage the Gateway service

```bash
openclaw gateway install
openclaw gateway start
openclaw gateway stop
openclaw gateway restart
openclaw gateway uninstall
```

Notes:

- `gateway install` supports `--port`, `--runtime`, `--token`, `--force`, `--json`.
- Lifecycle commands accept `--json` for scripting.

## Discover gateways (Bonjour)

`gateway discover` scans for Gateway beacons (`_openclaw-gw._tcp`).

- Multicast DNS-SD: `local.`
- Unicast DNS-SD (Wide-Area Bonjour): choose a domain (example: `openclaw.internal.`) and set up split DNS + a DNS server; see [/gateway/bonjour](/gateway/bonjour)

Only gateways with Bonjour discovery enabled (default) advertise the beacon.

Wide-Area discovery records include (TXT):

- `role` (gateway role hint)
- `transport` (transport hint, e.g. `gateway`)
- `gatewayPort` (WebSocket port, usually `18789`)
- `sshPort` (SSH port; defaults to `22` if not present)
- `tailnetDns` (MagicDNS hostname, when available)
- `gatewayTls` / `gatewayTlsSha256` (TLS enabled + cert fingerprint)
- `cliPath` (optional hint for remote installs)

### `gateway discover`

```bash
openclaw gateway discover
```

Options:

- `--timeout <ms>`: per-command timeout (browse/resolve); default `2000`.
- `--json`: machine-readable output (also disables styling/spinner).

Examples:

```bash
openclaw gateway discover --timeout 4000
openclaw gateway discover --json | jq '.beacons[].wsUrl'
```

Commit message:

Security: Prevent gateway credential exfiltration via URL override (#9179)
* Gateway: require explicit auth for url overrides

* Gateway: scope credential blocking to non-local URLs only

Address review feedback: the previous fix blocked credential fallback for
ALL URL overrides, which was overly strict and could break workflows that
use --url to switch between loopback/tailnet without passing credentials.

Now credential fallback is only blocked for non-local URLs (public IPs,
external hostnames). Local addresses (127.0.0.1, localhost, private IPs
like 192.168.x.x, 10.x.x.x, tailnet 100.x.x.x) still get credential
fallback as before.

This maintains the security fix (preventing credential exfiltration to
attacker-controlled URLs) while preserving backward compatibility for
legitimate local URL overrides.

* Security: require explicit credentials for gateway url overrides (#8113) (thanks @victormier)

* Gateway: reuse explicit auth helper for url overrides (#8113) (thanks @victormier)

* Tests: format gateway chat test (#8113) (thanks @victormier)

* Tests: require explicit auth for gateway url overrides (#8113) (thanks @victormier)

---------

Co-authored-by: Victor Mier <victormier@gmail.com>

docs/cli/gateway.md, after:

---
summary: "OpenClaw Gateway CLI (`openclaw gateway`) — run, query, and discover gateways"
read_when:
  - Running the Gateway from the CLI (dev or servers)
  - Debugging Gateway auth, bind modes, and connectivity
  - Discovering gateways via Bonjour (LAN + tailnet)
title: "gateway"
---

# Gateway CLI

The Gateway is OpenClaw’s WebSocket server (channels, nodes, sessions, hooks).

Subcommands in this page live under `openclaw gateway …`.

Related docs:

- [/gateway/bonjour](/gateway/bonjour)
- [/gateway/discovery](/gateway/discovery)
- [/gateway/configuration](/gateway/configuration)

## Run the Gateway

Run a local Gateway process:

```bash
openclaw gateway
```

Foreground alias:

```bash
openclaw gateway run
```

Notes:

- By default, the Gateway refuses to start unless `gateway.mode=local` is set in `~/.openclaw/openclaw.json`. Use `--allow-unconfigured` for ad-hoc/dev runs.
- Binding beyond loopback without auth is blocked (safety guardrail).
- `SIGUSR1` triggers an in-process restart when authorized (enable `commands.restart` or use the gateway tool/config apply/update).
- `SIGINT`/`SIGTERM` handlers stop the gateway process, but they don’t restore any custom terminal state. If you wrap the CLI with a TUI or raw-mode input, restore the terminal before exit.

### Options

- `--port <port>`: WebSocket port (default comes from config/env; usually `18789`).
- `--bind <loopback|lan|tailnet|auto|custom>`: listener bind mode.
- `--auth <token|password>`: auth mode override.
- `--token <token>`: token override (also sets `OPENCLAW_GATEWAY_TOKEN` for the process).
- `--password <password>`: password override (also sets `OPENCLAW_GATEWAY_PASSWORD` for the process).
- `--tailscale <off|serve|funnel>`: expose the Gateway via Tailscale.
- `--tailscale-reset-on-exit`: reset Tailscale serve/funnel config on shutdown.
- `--allow-unconfigured`: allow gateway start without `gateway.mode=local` in config.
- `--dev`: create a dev config + workspace if missing (skips BOOTSTRAP.md).
- `--reset`: reset dev config + credentials + sessions + workspace (requires `--dev`).
- `--force`: kill any existing listener on the selected port before starting.
- `--verbose`: verbose logs.
- `--claude-cli-logs`: only show claude-cli logs in the console (and enable its stdout/stderr).
- `--ws-log <auto|full|compact>`: websocket log style (default `auto`).
- `--compact`: alias for `--ws-log compact`.
- `--raw-stream`: log raw model stream events to jsonl.
- `--raw-stream-path <path>`: raw stream jsonl path.

## Query a running Gateway

All query commands use WebSocket RPC.

Output modes:

- Default: human-readable (colored in TTY).
- `--json`: machine-readable JSON (no styling/spinner).
- `--no-color` (or `NO_COLOR=1`): disable ANSI while keeping human layout.

Shared options (where supported):

- `--url <url>`: Gateway WebSocket URL.
- `--token <token>`: Gateway token.
- `--password <password>`: Gateway password.
- `--timeout <ms>`: timeout/budget (varies per command).
- `--expect-final`: wait for a “final” response (agent calls).

Note: when you set `--url`, the CLI does not fall back to config or environment credentials.
Pass `--token` or `--password` explicitly. Missing explicit credentials is an error.

### `gateway health`

```bash
openclaw gateway health --url ws://127.0.0.1:18789
```

### `gateway status`

`gateway status` shows the Gateway service (launchd/systemd/schtasks) plus an optional RPC probe.

```bash
openclaw gateway status
openclaw gateway status --json
```

Options:

- `--url <url>`: override the probe URL.
- `--token <token>`: token auth for the probe.
- `--password <password>`: password auth for the probe.
- `--timeout <ms>`: probe timeout (default `10000`).
- `--no-probe`: skip the RPC probe (service-only view).
- `--deep`: scan system-level services too.

### `gateway probe`

`gateway probe` is the “debug everything” command. It always probes:

- your configured remote gateway (if set), and
- localhost (loopback) **even if remote is configured**.

If multiple gateways are reachable, it prints all of them. Multiple gateways are supported when you use isolated profiles/ports (e.g., a rescue bot), but most installs still run a single gateway.

```bash
openclaw gateway probe
openclaw gateway probe --json
```

#### Remote over SSH (Mac app parity)

The macOS app “Remote over SSH” mode uses a local port-forward so the remote gateway (which may be bound to loopback only) becomes reachable at `ws://127.0.0.1:<port>`.

CLI equivalent:

```bash
openclaw gateway probe --ssh user@gateway-host
```

Options:

- `--ssh <target>`: `user@host` or `user@host:port` (port defaults to `22`).
- `--ssh-identity <path>`: identity file.
- `--ssh-auto`: pick the first discovered gateway host as SSH target (LAN/WAB only).

Config (optional, used as defaults):

- `gateway.remote.sshTarget`
- `gateway.remote.sshIdentity`

### `gateway call <method>`

Low-level RPC helper.

```bash
openclaw gateway call status
openclaw gateway call logs.tail --params '{"sinceMs": 60000}'
```

## Manage the Gateway service

```bash
openclaw gateway install
openclaw gateway start
openclaw gateway stop
openclaw gateway restart
openclaw gateway uninstall
```

Notes:

- `gateway install` supports `--port`, `--runtime`, `--token`, `--force`, `--json`.
- Lifecycle commands accept `--json` for scripting.

## Discover gateways (Bonjour)

`gateway discover` scans for Gateway beacons (`_openclaw-gw._tcp`).

- Multicast DNS-SD: `local.`
- Unicast DNS-SD (Wide-Area Bonjour): choose a domain (example: `openclaw.internal.`) and set up split DNS + a DNS server; see [/gateway/bonjour](/gateway/bonjour)

Only gateways with Bonjour discovery enabled (default) advertise the beacon.

Wide-Area discovery records include (TXT):

- `role` (gateway role hint)
- `transport` (transport hint, e.g. `gateway`)
- `gatewayPort` (WebSocket port, usually `18789`)
- `sshPort` (SSH port; defaults to `22` if not present)
- `tailnetDns` (MagicDNS hostname, when available)
- `gatewayTls` / `gatewayTlsSha256` (TLS enabled + cert fingerprint)
- `cliPath` (optional hint for remote installs)

### `gateway discover`

```bash
openclaw gateway discover
```

Options:

- `--timeout <ms>`: per-command timeout (browse/resolve); default `2000`.
- `--json`: machine-readable output (also disables styling/spinner).

Examples:

```bash
openclaw gateway discover --timeout 4000
openclaw gateway discover --json | jq '.beacons[].wsUrl'
```
