docs/cli/models.md, before:

---
summary: "CLI reference for `clawdbot models` (status/list/set/scan, aliases, fallbacks, auth)"
read_when:
  - You want to change default models or view provider auth status
  - You want to scan available models/providers and debug auth profiles
---

# `clawdbot models`

Model discovery, scanning, and configuration (default model, fallbacks, auth profiles).

Related:
- Providers + models: [Models](/providers/models)
- Provider auth setup: [Getting started](/start/getting-started)

## Common commands

```bash
clawdbot models status
clawdbot models list
clawdbot models set <model-or-alias>
clawdbot models scan
```

`clawdbot models status` shows the resolved default/fallbacks plus an auth overview.
When provider usage snapshots are available, the OAuth/token status section includes
provider usage headers.

## Aliases + fallbacks

```bash
clawdbot models aliases list
clawdbot models fallbacks list
```

## Auth profiles

```bash
clawdbot models auth add
clawdbot models auth login --provider <id>
clawdbot models auth setup-token
clawdbot models auth paste-token
```
`models auth login` runs a provider plugin’s auth flow (OAuth/API key). Use
`clawdbot plugins list` to see which providers are installed.

Notes:
- `setup-token` runs `claude setup-token` on the current machine (requires the Claude Code CLI).
- `paste-token` accepts a token string generated elsewhere.

Commit message:

docs: clarify model refs and runtime notes
Co-authored-by: Yuri Chukhlib <YuriNachos@users.noreply.github.com>

docs/cli/models.md, after:

---
summary: "CLI reference for `clawdbot models` (status/list/set/scan, aliases, fallbacks, auth)"
read_when:
  - You want to change default models or view provider auth status
  - You want to scan available models/providers and debug auth profiles
---

# `clawdbot models`

Model discovery, scanning, and configuration (default model, fallbacks, auth profiles).

Related:
- Providers + models: [Models](/providers/models)
- Provider auth setup: [Getting started](/start/getting-started)

## Common commands

```bash
clawdbot models status
clawdbot models list
clawdbot models set <model-or-alias>
clawdbot models scan
```

`clawdbot models status` shows the resolved default/fallbacks plus an auth overview.
When provider usage snapshots are available, the OAuth/token status section includes
provider usage headers.

Notes:
- `models set <model-or-alias>` accepts `provider/model` or an alias.
- Model refs are parsed by splitting on the **first** `/`. If the model ID includes `/` (OpenRouter-style), include the provider prefix (example: `openrouter/moonshotai/kimi-k2`).
- If you omit the provider, Clawdbot treats the input as an alias or a model for the **default provider** (only works when there is no `/` in the model ID).

## Aliases + fallbacks

```bash
clawdbot models aliases list
clawdbot models fallbacks list
```

## Auth profiles

```bash
clawdbot models auth add
clawdbot models auth login --provider <id>
clawdbot models auth setup-token
clawdbot models auth paste-token
```
`models auth login` runs a provider plugin’s auth flow (OAuth/API key). Use
`clawdbot plugins list` to see which providers are installed.

Notes:
- `setup-token` runs `claude setup-token` on the current machine (requires the Claude Code CLI).
- `paste-token` accepts a token string generated elsewhere.
