docs/channels/nextcloud-talk.md, before:

---
summary: "Nextcloud Talk support status, capabilities, and configuration"
read_when:
  - Working on Nextcloud Talk channel features
---
# Nextcloud Talk (plugin)

Status: supported via plugin (webhook bot). Direct messages, rooms, reactions, and markdown messages are supported.

## Plugin required
Nextcloud Talk ships as a plugin and is not bundled with the core install.

Install via CLI (npm registry):
```bash
clawdbot plugins install @clawdbot/nextcloud-talk
```

Local checkout (when running from a git repo):
```bash
clawdbot plugins install ./extensions/nextcloud-talk
```

If you choose Nextcloud Talk during configure/onboarding and a git checkout is detected,
Clawdbot will offer the local install path automatically.

Details: [Plugins](/plugin)

## Quick setup (beginner)
1) Install the Nextcloud Talk plugin.
2) On your Nextcloud server, create a bot:
   ```bash
   ./occ talk:bot:install "Clawdbot" "<shared-secret>" "<webhook-url>" --feature reaction
   ```
3) Enable the bot in the target room settings.
4) Configure Clawdbot:
   - Config: `channels.nextcloud-talk.baseUrl` + `channels.nextcloud-talk.botSecret`
   - Or env: `NEXTCLOUD_TALK_BOT_SECRET` (default account only)
5) Restart the gateway (or finish onboarding).

Minimal config:
```json5
{
  channels: {
    "nextcloud-talk": {
      enabled: true,
      baseUrl: "https://cloud.example.com",
      botSecret: "shared-secret",
      dmPolicy: "pairing"
    }
  }
}
```

## Notes
- Bots cannot initiate DMs. The user must message the bot first.
- Webhook URL must be reachable by the Gateway; set `webhookPublicUrl` if behind a proxy.
- Media uploads are not supported by the bot API; media is sent as URLs.
- The webhook payload does not distinguish DMs vs rooms; set `apiUser` + `apiPassword` to enable room-type lookups (otherwise DMs are treated as rooms).

## Access control (DMs)
- Default: `channels.nextcloud-talk.dmPolicy = "pairing"`. Unknown senders get a pairing code.
- Approve via:
  - `clawdbot pairing list nextcloud-talk`
  - `clawdbot pairing approve nextcloud-talk <CODE>`
- Public DMs: `channels.nextcloud-talk.dmPolicy="open"` plus `channels.nextcloud-talk.allowFrom=["*"]`.

## Rooms (groups)
- Default: `channels.nextcloud-talk.groupPolicy = "allowlist"` (mention-gated).
- Allowlist rooms with `channels.nextcloud-talk.rooms`:
```json5
{
  channels: {
    "nextcloud-talk": {
      rooms: {
        "room-token": { requireMention: true }
      }
    }
  }
}
```
- To allow no rooms, keep the allowlist empty or set `channels.nextcloud-talk.groupPolicy="disabled"`.

## Capabilities
| Feature | Status |
|---------|--------|
| Direct messages | Supported |
| Rooms | Supported |
| Threads | Not supported |
| Media | URL-only |
| Reactions | Supported |
| Native commands | Not supported |

## Configuration reference (Nextcloud Talk)
Full configuration: [Configuration](/gateway/configuration)

Provider options:
- `channels.nextcloud-talk.enabled`: enable/disable channel startup.
- `channels.nextcloud-talk.baseUrl`: Nextcloud instance URL.
- `channels.nextcloud-talk.botSecret`: bot shared secret.
- `channels.nextcloud-talk.botSecretFile`: secret file path.
- `channels.nextcloud-talk.apiUser`: API user for room lookups (DM detection).
- `channels.nextcloud-talk.apiPassword`: API/app password for room lookups.
- `channels.nextcloud-talk.apiPasswordFile`: API password file path.
- `channels.nextcloud-talk.webhookPort`: webhook listener port (default: 8788).
- `channels.nextcloud-talk.webhookHost`: webhook host (default: 0.0.0.0).
- `channels.nextcloud-talk.webhookPath`: webhook path (default: /nextcloud-talk-webhook).
- `channels.nextcloud-talk.webhookPublicUrl`: externally reachable webhook URL.
- `channels.nextcloud-talk.dmPolicy`: `pairing | allowlist | open | disabled`.
- `channels.nextcloud-talk.allowFrom`: DM allowlist (user IDs). `open` requires `"*"`.
- `channels.nextcloud-talk.groupPolicy`: `allowlist | open | disabled`.
- `channels.nextcloud-talk.groupAllowFrom`: group allowlist (user IDs).
- `channels.nextcloud-talk.rooms`: per-room settings and allowlist.
- `channels.nextcloud-talk.historyLimit`: group history limit (0 disables).
- `channels.nextcloud-talk.dmHistoryLimit`: DM history limit (0 disables).
- `channels.nextcloud-talk.dms`: per-DM overrides (historyLimit).
- `channels.nextcloud-talk.textChunkLimit`: outbound text chunk size (chars).
- `channels.nextcloud-talk.blockStreaming`: disable block streaming for this channel.
- `channels.nextcloud-talk.blockStreamingCoalesce`: block streaming coalesce tuning.
- `channels.nextcloud-talk.mediaMaxMb`: inbound media cap (MB).

Commit message:

fix: newline chunking across channels

docs/channels/nextcloud-talk.md, after:

---
summary: "Nextcloud Talk support status, capabilities, and configuration"
read_when:
  - Working on Nextcloud Talk channel features
---
# Nextcloud Talk (plugin)

Status: supported via plugin (webhook bot). Direct messages, rooms, reactions, and markdown messages are supported.

## Plugin required
Nextcloud Talk ships as a plugin and is not bundled with the core install.

Install via CLI (npm registry):
```bash
clawdbot plugins install @clawdbot/nextcloud-talk
```

Local checkout (when running from a git repo):
```bash
clawdbot plugins install ./extensions/nextcloud-talk
```

If you choose Nextcloud Talk during configure/onboarding and a git checkout is detected,
Clawdbot will offer the local install path automatically.

Details: [Plugins](/plugin)

## Quick setup (beginner)
1) Install the Nextcloud Talk plugin.
2) On your Nextcloud server, create a bot:
   ```bash
   ./occ talk:bot:install "Clawdbot" "<shared-secret>" "<webhook-url>" --feature reaction
   ```
3) Enable the bot in the target room settings.
4) Configure Clawdbot:
   - Config: `channels.nextcloud-talk.baseUrl` + `channels.nextcloud-talk.botSecret`
   - Or env: `NEXTCLOUD_TALK_BOT_SECRET` (default account only)
5) Restart the gateway (or finish onboarding).

Minimal config:
```json5
{
  channels: {
    "nextcloud-talk": {
      enabled: true,
      baseUrl: "https://cloud.example.com",
      botSecret: "shared-secret",
      dmPolicy: "pairing"
    }
  }
}
```

## Notes
- Bots cannot initiate DMs. The user must message the bot first.
- Webhook URL must be reachable by the Gateway; set `webhookPublicUrl` if behind a proxy.
- Media uploads are not supported by the bot API; media is sent as URLs.
- The webhook payload does not distinguish DMs vs rooms; set `apiUser` + `apiPassword` to enable room-type lookups (otherwise DMs are treated as rooms).

## Access control (DMs)
- Default: `channels.nextcloud-talk.dmPolicy = "pairing"`. Unknown senders get a pairing code.
- Approve via:
  - `clawdbot pairing list nextcloud-talk`
  - `clawdbot pairing approve nextcloud-talk <CODE>`
- Public DMs: `channels.nextcloud-talk.dmPolicy="open"` plus `channels.nextcloud-talk.allowFrom=["*"]`.

## Rooms (groups)
- Default: `channels.nextcloud-talk.groupPolicy = "allowlist"` (mention-gated).
- Allowlist rooms with `channels.nextcloud-talk.rooms`:
```json5
{
  channels: {
    "nextcloud-talk": {
      rooms: {
        "room-token": { requireMention: true }
      }
    }
  }
}
```
- To allow no rooms, keep the allowlist empty or set `channels.nextcloud-talk.groupPolicy="disabled"`.

## Capabilities
| Feature | Status |
|---------|--------|
| Direct messages | Supported |
| Rooms | Supported |
| Threads | Not supported |
| Media | URL-only |
| Reactions | Supported |
| Native commands | Not supported |

## Configuration reference (Nextcloud Talk)
Full configuration: [Configuration](/gateway/configuration)

Provider options:
- `channels.nextcloud-talk.enabled`: enable/disable channel startup.
- `channels.nextcloud-talk.baseUrl`: Nextcloud instance URL.
- `channels.nextcloud-talk.botSecret`: bot shared secret.
- `channels.nextcloud-talk.botSecretFile`: secret file path.
- `channels.nextcloud-talk.apiUser`: API user for room lookups (DM detection).
- `channels.nextcloud-talk.apiPassword`: API/app password for room lookups.
- `channels.nextcloud-talk.apiPasswordFile`: API password file path.
- `channels.nextcloud-talk.webhookPort`: webhook listener port (default: 8788).
- `channels.nextcloud-talk.webhookHost`: webhook host (default: 0.0.0.0).
- `channels.nextcloud-talk.webhookPath`: webhook path (default: /nextcloud-talk-webhook).
- `channels.nextcloud-talk.webhookPublicUrl`: externally reachable webhook URL.
- `channels.nextcloud-talk.dmPolicy`: `pairing | allowlist | open | disabled`.
- `channels.nextcloud-talk.allowFrom`: DM allowlist (user IDs). `open` requires `"*"`.
- `channels.nextcloud-talk.groupPolicy`: `allowlist | open | disabled`.
- `channels.nextcloud-talk.groupAllowFrom`: group allowlist (user IDs).
- `channels.nextcloud-talk.rooms`: per-room settings and allowlist.
- `channels.nextcloud-talk.historyLimit`: group history limit (0 disables).
- `channels.nextcloud-talk.dmHistoryLimit`: DM history limit (0 disables).
- `channels.nextcloud-talk.dms`: per-DM overrides (historyLimit).
- `channels.nextcloud-talk.textChunkLimit`: outbound text chunk size (chars).
- `channels.nextcloud-talk.chunkMode`: `length` (default) or `newline` to split on newlines before length chunking.
- `channels.nextcloud-talk.blockStreaming`: disable block streaming for this channel.
- `channels.nextcloud-talk.blockStreamingCoalesce`: block streaming coalesce tuning.
- `channels.nextcloud-talk.mediaMaxMb`: inbound media cap (MB).
