docs/channels/zalo.md, before:

---
summary: "Zalo bot support status, capabilities, and configuration"
read_when:
  - Working on Zalo features or webhooks
---
# Zalo (Bot API)

Status: experimental. Direct messages only; groups coming soon per Zalo docs.

## Quick setup (beginner)
1) Install the Zalo plugin:
   - From a source checkout: `clawdbot plugins install ./extensions/zalo`
   - From npm (if published): `clawdbot plugins install @clawdbot/zalo`
   - Or pick **Zalo** in onboarding and confirm the install prompt
2) Set the token:
   - Env: `ZALO_BOT_TOKEN=...`
   - Or config: `channels.zalo.botToken: "..."`.
3) Restart the gateway (or finish onboarding).
4) DM access is pairing by default; approve the pairing code on first contact.

Minimal config:
```json5
{
  channels: {
    zalo: {
      enabled: true,
      botToken: "12345689:abc-xyz",
      dmPolicy: "pairing"
    }
  }
}
```

## What it is
- A Zalo Bot API channel owned by the Gateway.
- Deterministic routing: replies go back to Zalo; the model never chooses channels.
- DMs share the agent's main session.
- Groups are not yet supported (Zalo docs state "coming soon").

## Setup (fast path)

### 1) Create a bot token (Zalo Bot Platform)
1) Go to **https://bot.zaloplatforms.com** and sign in.
2) Create a new bot and configure its settings.
3) Copy the bot token (format: `12345689:abc-xyz`).

### 2) Configure the token (env or config)
Example:

```json5
{
  channels: {
    zalo: {
      enabled: true,
      botToken: "12345689:abc-xyz",
      dmPolicy: "pairing"
    }
  }
}
```

Env option: `ZALO_BOT_TOKEN=...` (works for the default account only).

Multi-account support: use `channels.zalo.accounts` with per-account tokens and optional `name`.

3) Restart the gateway. Zalo starts when a token is resolved (env or config).
4) DM access defaults to pairing. Approve the code when the bot is first contacted.

## How it works (behavior)
- Inbound messages are normalized into the shared channel envelope with media placeholders.
- Replies always route back to the same Zalo chat.
- Long-polling by default; webhook mode available with `channels.zalo.webhookUrl`.

## Limits
- Outbound text is chunked to 2000 characters (Zalo API limit).
- Media downloads/uploads are capped by `channels.zalo.mediaMaxMb` (default 5).
- Streaming is blocked by default due to the 2000 char limit making streaming less useful.

## Access control (DMs)

### DM access
- Default: `channels.zalo.dmPolicy = "pairing"`. Unknown senders receive a pairing code; messages are ignored until approved (codes expire after 1 hour).
- Approve via:
  - `clawdbot pairing list zalo`
  - `clawdbot pairing approve zalo <CODE>`
- Pairing is the default token exchange. Details: [Pairing](/start/pairing)
- `channels.zalo.allowFrom` accepts numeric user IDs.

## Long-polling vs webhook
- Default: long-polling (no public URL required).
- Webhook mode: set `channels.zalo.webhookUrl` and `channels.zalo.webhookSecret`.
  - The webhook secret must be 8-256 characters.
  - Webhook URL must use HTTPS.
  - Zalo sends events with `X-Bot-Api-Secret-Token` header for verification.
  - Gateway HTTP handles webhook requests at `channels.zalo.webhookPath` (defaults to the webhook URL path).

**Note:** getUpdates (polling) and webhook are mutually exclusive per Zalo API docs.

## Supported message types
- **Text messages**: Full support with 2000 character chunking.
- **Image messages**: Download and process inbound images; send images via `sendPhoto`.
- **Stickers**: Logged but not fully processed (no agent response).
- **Unsupported types**: Logged (e.g., messages from protected users).

## Capabilities
| Feature | Status |
|---------|--------|
| Direct messages | ✅ Supported |
| Groups | ❌ Coming soon (per Zalo docs) |
| Media (images) | ✅ Supported |
| Reactions | ❌ Not supported |
| Threads | ❌ Not supported |
| Polls | ❌ Not supported |
| Native commands | ❌ Not supported |
| Streaming | ⚠️ Blocked (2000 char limit) |

## Delivery targets (CLI/cron)
- Use a chat id as the target.
- Example: `clawdbot message send --channel zalo --to 123456789 --message "hi"`.

## Troubleshooting

**Bot doesn't respond:**
- Check that the token is valid: `clawdbot channels status --probe`
- Verify the sender is approved (pairing or allowFrom)
- Check gateway logs: `clawdbot logs --follow`

**Webhook not receiving events:**
- Ensure webhook URL uses HTTPS
- Verify secret token is 8-256 characters
- Confirm the gateway HTTP endpoint is reachable on the configured path
- Check that getUpdates polling is not running (they're mutually exclusive)

## Configuration reference (Zalo)
Full configuration: [Configuration](/gateway/configuration)

Provider options:
- `channels.zalo.enabled`: enable/disable channel startup.
- `channels.zalo.botToken`: bot token from Zalo Bot Platform.
- `channels.zalo.tokenFile`: read token from file path.
- `channels.zalo.dmPolicy`: `pairing | allowlist | open | disabled` (default: pairing).
- `channels.zalo.allowFrom`: DM allowlist (user IDs). `open` requires `"*"`.
- `channels.zalo.mediaMaxMb`: inbound/outbound media cap (MB, default 5).
- `channels.zalo.webhookUrl`: enable webhook mode (HTTPS required).
- `channels.zalo.webhookSecret`: webhook secret (8-256 chars).
- `channels.zalo.webhookPath`: webhook path on the gateway HTTP server.
- `channels.zalo.proxy`: proxy URL for API requests.

Multi-account options:
- `channels.zalo.accounts.<id>.botToken`: per-account token.
- `channels.zalo.accounts.<id>.tokenFile`: per-account token file.
- `channels.zalo.accounts.<id>.name`: display name.
- `channels.zalo.accounts.<id>.enabled`: enable/disable account.
- `channels.zalo.accounts.<id>.dmPolicy`: per-account DM policy.
- `channels.zalo.accounts.<id>.allowFrom`: per-account allowlist.
- `channels.zalo.accounts.<id>.webhookUrl`: per-account webhook URL.
- `channels.zalo.accounts.<id>.webhookSecret`: per-account webhook secret.
- `channels.zalo.accounts.<id>.webhookPath`: per-account webhook path.
- `channels.zalo.accounts.<id>.proxy`: per-account proxy URL.

Commit message:

docs: add Zalo channel nav + plugin note

docs/channels/zalo.md, after:

---
summary: "Zalo bot support status, capabilities, and configuration"
read_when:
  - Working on Zalo features or webhooks
---
# Zalo (Bot API)

Status: experimental. Direct messages only; groups coming soon per Zalo docs.

## Plugin required
Zalo ships as a plugin and is not bundled with the core install.
- Install via CLI: `clawdbot plugins install @clawdbot/zalo`
- Or select **Zalo** during onboarding and confirm the install prompt
- Details: [Plugins](/plugin)

## Quick setup (beginner)
1) Install the Zalo plugin:
   - From a source checkout: `clawdbot plugins install ./extensions/zalo`
   - From npm (if published): `clawdbot plugins install @clawdbot/zalo`
   - Or pick **Zalo** in onboarding and confirm the install prompt
2) Set the token:
   - Env: `ZALO_BOT_TOKEN=...`
   - Or config: `channels.zalo.botToken: "..."`.
3) Restart the gateway (or finish onboarding).
4) DM access is pairing by default; approve the pairing code on first contact.

Minimal config:
```json5
{
  channels: {
    zalo: {
      enabled: true,
      botToken: "12345689:abc-xyz",
      dmPolicy: "pairing"
    }
  }
}
```

## What it is
- A Zalo Bot API channel owned by the Gateway.
- Deterministic routing: replies go back to Zalo; the model never chooses channels.
- DMs share the agent's main session.
- Groups are not yet supported (Zalo docs state "coming soon").

## Setup (fast path)

### 1) Create a bot token (Zalo Bot Platform)
1) Go to **https://bot.zaloplatforms.com** and sign in.
2) Create a new bot and configure its settings.
3) Copy the bot token (format: `12345689:abc-xyz`).

### 2) Configure the token (env or config)
Example:

```json5
{
  channels: {
    zalo: {
      enabled: true,
      botToken: "12345689:abc-xyz",
      dmPolicy: "pairing"
    }
  }
}
```

Env option: `ZALO_BOT_TOKEN=...` (works for the default account only).

Multi-account support: use `channels.zalo.accounts` with per-account tokens and optional `name`.

3) Restart the gateway. Zalo starts when a token is resolved (env or config).
4) DM access defaults to pairing. Approve the code when the bot is first contacted.

## How it works (behavior)
- Inbound messages are normalized into the shared channel envelope with media placeholders.
- Replies always route back to the same Zalo chat.
- Long-polling by default; webhook mode available with `channels.zalo.webhookUrl`.

## Limits
- Outbound text is chunked to 2000 characters (Zalo API limit).
- Media downloads/uploads are capped by `channels.zalo.mediaMaxMb` (default 5).
- Streaming is blocked by default due to the 2000 char limit making streaming less useful.

## Access control (DMs)

### DM access
- Default: `channels.zalo.dmPolicy = "pairing"`. Unknown senders receive a pairing code; messages are ignored until approved (codes expire after 1 hour).
- Approve via:
  - `clawdbot pairing list zalo`
  - `clawdbot pairing approve zalo <CODE>`
- Pairing is the default token exchange. Details: [Pairing](/start/pairing)
- `channels.zalo.allowFrom` accepts numeric user IDs.

## Long-polling vs webhook
- Default: long-polling (no public URL required).
- Webhook mode: set `channels.zalo.webhookUrl` and `channels.zalo.webhookSecret`.
  - The webhook secret must be 8-256 characters.
  - Webhook URL must use HTTPS.
  - Zalo sends events with `X-Bot-Api-Secret-Token` header for verification.
  - Gateway HTTP handles webhook requests at `channels.zalo.webhookPath` (defaults to the webhook URL path).

**Note:** getUpdates (polling) and webhook are mutually exclusive per Zalo API docs.

## Supported message types
- **Text messages**: Full support with 2000 character chunking.
- **Image messages**: Download and process inbound images; send images via `sendPhoto`.
- **Stickers**: Logged but not fully processed (no agent response).
- **Unsupported types**: Logged (e.g., messages from protected users).

## Capabilities
| Feature | Status |
|---------|--------|
| Direct messages | ✅ Supported |
| Groups | ❌ Coming soon (per Zalo docs) |
| Media (images) | ✅ Supported |
| Reactions | ❌ Not supported |
| Threads | ❌ Not supported |
| Polls | ❌ Not supported |
| Native commands | ❌ Not supported |
| Streaming | ⚠️ Blocked (2000 char limit) |

## Delivery targets (CLI/cron)
- Use a chat id as the target.
- Example: `clawdbot message send --channel zalo --to 123456789 --message "hi"`.

## Troubleshooting

**Bot doesn't respond:**
- Check that the token is valid: `clawdbot channels status --probe`
- Verify the sender is approved (pairing or allowFrom)
- Check gateway logs: `clawdbot logs --follow`

**Webhook not receiving events:**
- Ensure webhook URL uses HTTPS
- Verify secret token is 8-256 characters
- Confirm the gateway HTTP endpoint is reachable on the configured path
- Check that getUpdates polling is not running (they're mutually exclusive)

## Configuration reference (Zalo)
Full configuration: [Configuration](/gateway/configuration)

Provider options:
- `channels.zalo.enabled`: enable/disable channel startup.
- `channels.zalo.botToken`: bot token from Zalo Bot Platform.
- `channels.zalo.tokenFile`: read token from file path.
- `channels.zalo.dmPolicy`: `pairing | allowlist | open | disabled` (default: pairing).
- `channels.zalo.allowFrom`: DM allowlist (user IDs). `open` requires `"*"`.
- `channels.zalo.mediaMaxMb`: inbound/outbound media cap (MB, default 5).
- `channels.zalo.webhookUrl`: enable webhook mode (HTTPS required).
- `channels.zalo.webhookSecret`: webhook secret (8-256 chars).
- `channels.zalo.webhookPath`: webhook path on the gateway HTTP server.
- `channels.zalo.proxy`: proxy URL for API requests.

Multi-account options:
- `channels.zalo.accounts.<id>.botToken`: per-account token.
- `channels.zalo.accounts.<id>.tokenFile`: per-account token file.
- `channels.zalo.accounts.<id>.name`: display name.
- `channels.zalo.accounts.<id>.enabled`: enable/disable account.
- `channels.zalo.accounts.<id>.dmPolicy`: per-account DM policy.
- `channels.zalo.accounts.<id>.allowFrom`: per-account allowlist.
- `channels.zalo.accounts.<id>.webhookUrl`: per-account webhook URL.
- `channels.zalo.accounts.<id>.webhookSecret`: per-account webhook secret.
- `channels.zalo.accounts.<id>.webhookPath`: per-account webhook path.
- `channels.zalo.accounts.<id>.proxy`: per-account proxy URL.
