docs/tools/index.md, before:

---
summary: "Agent tool surface for Clawdbot (browser, canvas, nodes, message, cron) replacing legacy `clawdbot-*` skills"
read_when:
  - Adding or modifying agent tools
  - Retiring or changing `clawdbot-*` skills
---

# Tools (Clawdbot)

Clawdbot exposes **first-class agent tools** for browser, canvas, nodes, and cron.
These replace the old `clawdbot-*` skills: the tools are typed, no shelling,
and the agent should rely on them directly.

## Disabling tools

You can globally allow/deny tools via `tools.allow` / `tools.deny` in `clawdbot.json`
(deny wins). This prevents disallowed tools from being sent to model providers.

```json5
{
  tools: { deny: ["browser"] }
}
```

Notes:
- Matching is case-insensitive.
- `*` wildcards are supported (`"*"` means all tools).
- If `tools.allow` only references unknown or unloaded plugin tool names, Clawdbot logs a warning and ignores the allowlist so core tools stay available.

## Tool profiles (base allowlist)

`tools.profile` sets a **base tool allowlist** before `tools.allow`/`tools.deny`.
Per-agent override: `agents.list[].tools.profile`.

Profiles:
- `minimal`: `session_status` only
- `coding`: `group:fs`, `group:runtime`, `group:sessions`, `group:memory`, `image`
- `messaging`: `group:messaging`, `sessions_list`, `sessions_history`, `sessions_send`, `session_status`
- `full`: no restriction (same as unset)

Example (messaging-only by default, allow Slack + Discord tools too):
```json5
{
  tools: {
    profile: "messaging",
    allow: ["slack", "discord"]
  }
}
```

Example (coding profile, but deny exec/process everywhere):
```json5
{
  tools: {
    profile: "coding",
    deny: ["group:runtime"]
  }
}
```

Example (global coding profile, messaging-only support agent):
```json5
{
  tools: { profile: "coding" },
  agents: {
    list: [
      {
        id: "support",
        tools: { profile: "messaging", allow: ["slack"] }
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

## Provider-specific tool policy

Use `tools.byProvider` to **further restrict** tools for specific providers
(or a single `provider/model`) without changing your global defaults.
Per-agent override: `agents.list[].tools.byProvider`.

This is applied **after** the base tool profile and **before** allow/deny lists,
so it can only narrow the tool set.
Provider keys accept either `provider` (e.g. `google-antigravity`) or
`provider/model` (e.g. `openai/gpt-5.2`).

Example (keep global coding profile, but minimal tools for Google Antigravity):
```json5
{
  tools: {
    profile: "coding",
    byProvider: {
      "google-antigravity": { profile: "minimal" }
    }
  }
}
```

Example (provider/model-specific allowlist for a flaky endpoint):
```json5
{
  tools: {
    allow: ["group:fs", "group:runtime", "sessions_list"],
    byProvider: {
      "openai/gpt-5.2": { allow: ["group:fs", "sessions_list"] }
    }
  }
}
```

Example (agent-specific override for a single provider):
```json5
{
  agents: {
    list: [
      {
        id: "support",
        tools: {
          byProvider: {
            "google-antigravity": { allow: ["message", "sessions_list"] }
          }
        }
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

## Tool groups (shorthands)

Tool policies (global, agent, sandbox) support `group:*` entries that expand to multiple tools.
Use these in `tools.allow` / `tools.deny`.

Available groups:
- `group:runtime`: `exec`, `bash`, `process`
- `group:fs`: `read`, `write`, `edit`, `apply_patch`
- `group:sessions`: `sessions_list`, `sessions_history`, `sessions_send`, `sessions_spawn`, `session_status`
- `group:memory`: `memory_search`, `memory_get`
- `group:web`: `web_search`, `web_fetch`
- `group:ui`: `browser`, `canvas`
- `group:automation`: `cron`, `gateway`
- `group:messaging`: `message`
- `group:nodes`: `nodes`
- `group:clawdbot`: all built-in Clawdbot tools (excludes provider plugins)

Example (allow only file tools + browser):
```json5
{
  tools: {
    allow: ["group:fs", "browser"]
  }
}
```

## Plugins + tools

Plugins can register **additional tools** (and CLI commands) beyond the core set.
See [Plugins](/plugin) for install + config, and [Skills](/tools/skills) for how
tool usage guidance is injected into prompts. Some plugins ship their own skills
alongside tools (for example, the voice-call plugin).

Optional plugin tools:
- [Lobster](/tools/lobster): typed workflow runtime with resumable approvals (requires the Lobster CLI on the gateway host).
- [LLM Task](/tools/llm-task): JSON-only LLM step for structured workflow output (optional schema validation).

## Tool inventory

### `apply_patch`
Apply structured patches across one or more files. Use for multi-hunk edits.
Experimental: enable via `tools.exec.applyPatch.enabled` (OpenAI models only).

### `exec`
Run shell commands in the workspace.

Core parameters:
- `command` (required)
- `yieldMs` (auto-background after timeout, default 10000)
- `background` (immediate background)
- `timeout` (seconds; kills the process if exceeded, default 1800)
- `elevated` (bool; run on host if elevated mode is enabled/allowed; only changes behavior when the agent is sandboxed)
- `host` (`sandbox | gateway | node`)
- `security` (`deny | allowlist | full`)
- `ask` (`off | on-miss | always`)
- `node` (node id/name for `host=node`)
- Need a real TTY? Set `pty: true`.

Notes:
- Returns `status: "running"` with a `sessionId` when backgrounded.
- Use `process` to poll/log/write/kill/clear background sessions.
- If `process` is disallowed, `exec` runs synchronously and ignores `yieldMs`/`background`.
- `elevated` is gated by `tools.elevated` plus any `agents.list[].tools.elevated` override (both must allow) and is an alias for `host=gateway` + `security=full`.
- `elevated` only changes behavior when the agent is sandboxed (otherwise it’s a no-op).
- `host=node` can target a macOS companion app or a headless node host (`clawdbot node run`).
- gateway/node approvals and allowlists: [Exec approvals](/tools/exec-approvals).

### `process`
Manage background exec sessions.

Core actions:
- `list`, `poll`, `log`, `write`, `kill`, `clear`, `remove`

Notes:
- `poll` returns new output and exit status when complete.
- `log` supports line-based `offset`/`limit` (omit `offset` to grab the last N lines).
- `process` is scoped per agent; sessions from other agents are not visible.

### `web_search`
Search the web using Brave Search API.

Core parameters:
- `query` (required)
- `count` (1–10; default from `tools.web.search.maxResults`)

Notes:
- Requires a Brave API key (recommended: `clawdbot configure --section web`, or set `BRAVE_API_KEY`).
- Enable via `tools.web.search.enabled`.
- Responses are cached (default 15 min).
- See [Web tools](/tools/web) for setup.

### `web_fetch`
Fetch and extract readable content from a URL (HTML → markdown/text).

Core parameters:
- `url` (required)
- `extractMode` (`markdown` | `text`)
- `maxChars` (truncate long pages)

Notes:
- Enable via `tools.web.fetch.enabled`.
- Responses are cached (default 15 min).
- For JS-heavy sites, prefer the browser tool.
- See [Web tools](/tools/web) for setup.
- See [Firecrawl](/tools/firecrawl) for the optional anti-bot fallback.

### `browser`
Control the dedicated clawd browser.

Core actions:
- `status`, `start`, `stop`, `tabs`, `open`, `focus`, `close`
- `snapshot` (aria/ai)
- `screenshot` (returns image block + `MEDIA:<path>`)
- `act` (UI actions: click/type/press/hover/drag/select/fill/resize/wait/evaluate)
- `navigate`, `console`, `pdf`, `upload`, `dialog`

Profile management:
- `profiles` — list all browser profiles with status
- `create-profile` — create new profile with auto-allocated port (or `cdpUrl`)
- `delete-profile` — stop browser, delete user data, remove from config (local only)
- `reset-profile` — kill orphan process on profile's port (local only)

Common parameters:
- `profile` (optional; defaults to `browser.defaultProfile`)
- `target` (`sandbox` | `host` | `node`)
- `node` (optional; picks a specific node id/name)
Notes:
- Requires `browser.enabled=true` (default is `true`; set `false` to disable).
- All actions accept optional `profile` parameter for multi-instance support.
- When `profile` is omitted, uses `browser.defaultProfile` (defaults to "chrome").
- Profile names: lowercase alphanumeric + hyphens only (max 64 chars).
- Port range: 18800-18899 (~100 profiles max).
- Remote profiles are attach-only (no start/stop/reset).
- If a browser-capable node is connected, the tool may auto-route to it (unless you pin `target`).
- `snapshot` defaults to `ai` when Playwright is installed; use `aria` for the accessibility tree.
- `snapshot` also supports role-snapshot options (`interactive`, `compact`, `depth`, `selector`) which return refs like `e12`.
- `act` requires `ref` from `snapshot` (numeric `12` from AI snapshots, or `e12` from role snapshots); use `evaluate` for rare CSS selector needs.
- Avoid `act` → `wait` by default; use it only in exceptional cases (no reliable UI state to wait on).
- `upload` can optionally pass a `ref` to auto-click after arming.
- `upload` also supports `inputRef` (aria ref) or `element` (CSS selector) to set `<input type="file">` directly.

### `canvas`
Drive the node Canvas (present, eval, snapshot, A2UI).

Core actions:
- `present`, `hide`, `navigate`, `eval`
- `snapshot` (returns image block + `MEDIA:<path>`)
- `a2ui_push`, `a2ui_reset`

Notes:
- Uses gateway `node.invoke` under the hood.
- If no `node` is provided, the tool picks a default (single connected node or local mac node).
- A2UI is v0.8 only (no `createSurface`); the CLI rejects v0.9 JSONL with line errors.
- Quick smoke: `clawdbot nodes canvas a2ui push --node <id> --text "Hello from A2UI"`.

### `nodes`
Discover and target paired nodes; send notifications; capture camera/screen.

Core actions:
- `status`, `describe`
- `pending`, `approve`, `reject` (pairing)
- `notify` (macOS `system.notify`)
- `run` (macOS `system.run`)
- `camera_snap`, `camera_clip`, `screen_record`
- `location_get`

Notes:
- Camera/screen commands require the node app to be foregrounded.
- Images return image blocks + `MEDIA:<path>`.
- Videos return `FILE:<path>` (mp4).
- Location returns a JSON payload (lat/lon/accuracy/timestamp).
- `run` params: `command` argv array; optional `cwd`, `env` (`KEY=VAL`), `commandTimeoutMs`, `invokeTimeoutMs`, `needsScreenRecording`.

Example (`run`):
```json
{
  "action": "run",
  "node": "office-mac",
  "command": ["echo", "Hello"],
  "env": ["FOO=bar"],
  "commandTimeoutMs": 12000,
  "invokeTimeoutMs": 45000,
  "needsScreenRecording": false
}
```

### `image`
Analyze an image with the configured image model.

Core parameters:
- `image` (required path or URL)
- `prompt` (optional; defaults to "Describe the image.")
- `model` (optional override)
- `maxBytesMb` (optional size cap)

Notes:
- Only available when `agents.defaults.imageModel` is configured (primary or fallbacks), or when an implicit image model can be inferred from your default model + configured auth (best-effort pairing).
- Uses the image model directly (independent of the main chat model).

### `message`
Send messages and channel actions across Discord/Google Chat/Slack/Telegram/WhatsApp/Signal/iMessage/MS Teams.

Core actions:
- `send` (text + optional media; MS Teams also supports `card` for Adaptive Cards)
- `poll` (WhatsApp/Discord/MS Teams polls)
- `react` / `reactions` / `read` / `edit` / `delete`
- `pin` / `unpin` / `list-pins`
- `permissions`
- `thread-create` / `thread-list` / `thread-reply`
- `search`
- `sticker`
- `member-info` / `role-info`
- `emoji-list` / `emoji-upload` / `sticker-upload`
- `role-add` / `role-remove`
- `channel-info` / `channel-list`
- `voice-status`
- `event-list` / `event-create`
- `timeout` / `kick` / `ban`

Notes:
- `send` routes WhatsApp via the Gateway; other channels go direct.
- `poll` uses the Gateway for WhatsApp and MS Teams; Discord polls go direct.
- When a message tool call is bound to an active chat session, sends are constrained to that session’s target to avoid cross-context leaks.

### `cron`
Manage Gateway cron jobs and wakeups.

Core actions:
- `status`, `list`
- `add`, `update`, `remove`, `run`, `runs`
- `wake` (enqueue system event + optional immediate heartbeat)

Notes:
- `add` expects a full cron job object (same schema as `cron.add` RPC).
- `update` uses `{ id, patch }`.

### `gateway`
Restart or apply updates to the running Gateway process (in-place).

Core actions:
- `restart` (authorizes + sends `SIGUSR1` for in-process restart; `clawdbot gateway` restart in-place)
- `config.get` / `config.schema`
- `config.apply` (validate + write config + restart + wake)
- `config.patch` (merge partial update + restart + wake)
- `update.run` (run update + restart + wake)

Notes:
- Use `delayMs` (defaults to 2000) to avoid interrupting an in-flight reply.
- `restart` is disabled by default; enable with `commands.restart: true`.

### `sessions_list` / `sessions_history` / `sessions_send` / `sessions_spawn` / `session_status`
List sessions, inspect transcript history, or send to another session.

Core parameters:
- `sessions_list`: `kinds?`, `limit?`, `activeMinutes?`, `messageLimit?` (0 = none)
- `sessions_history`: `sessionKey` (or `sessionId`), `limit?`, `includeTools?`
- `sessions_send`: `sessionKey` (or `sessionId`), `message`, `timeoutSeconds?` (0 = fire-and-forget)
- `sessions_spawn`: `task`, `label?`, `agentId?`, `model?`, `runTimeoutSeconds?`, `cleanup?`
- `session_status`: `sessionKey?` (default current; accepts `sessionId`), `model?` (`default` clears override)

Notes:
- `main` is the canonical direct-chat key; global/unknown are hidden.
- `messageLimit > 0` fetches last N messages per session (tool messages filtered).
- `sessions_send` waits for final completion when `timeoutSeconds > 0`.
- Delivery/announce happens after completion and is best-effort; `status: "ok"` confirms the agent run finished, not that the announce was delivered.
- `sessions_spawn` starts a sub-agent run and posts an announce reply back to the requester chat.
- `sessions_spawn` is non-blocking and returns `status: "accepted"` immediately.
- `sessions_send` runs a reply‑back ping‑pong (reply `REPLY_SKIP` to stop; max turns via `session.agentToAgent.maxPingPongTurns`, 0–5).
- After the ping‑pong, the target agent runs an **announce step**; reply `ANNOUNCE_SKIP` to suppress the announcement.

### `agents_list`
List agent ids that the current session may target with `sessions_spawn`.

Notes:
- Result is restricted to per-agent allowlists (`agents.list[].subagents.allowAgents`).
- When `["*"]` is configured, the tool includes all configured agents and marks `allowAny: true`.

## Parameters (common)

Gateway-backed tools (`canvas`, `nodes`, `cron`):
- `gatewayUrl` (default `ws://127.0.0.1:18789`)
- `gatewayToken` (if auth enabled)
- `timeoutMs`

Browser tool:
- `profile` (optional; defaults to `browser.defaultProfile`)
- `target` (`sandbox` | `host` | `node`)
- `node` (optional; pin a specific node id/name)

## Recommended agent flows

Browser automation:
1) `browser` → `status` / `start`
2) `snapshot` (ai or aria)
3) `act` (click/type/press)
4) `screenshot` if you need visual confirmation

Canvas render:
1) `canvas` → `present`
2) `a2ui_push` (optional)
3) `snapshot`

Node targeting:
1) `nodes` → `status`
2) `describe` on the chosen node
3) `notify` / `run` / `camera_snap` / `screen_record`

## Safety

- Avoid direct `system.run`; use `nodes` → `run` only with explicit user consent.
- Respect user consent for camera/screen capture.
- Use `status/describe` to ensure permissions before invoking media commands.

## How tools are presented to the agent

Tools are exposed in two parallel channels:

1) **System prompt text**: a human-readable list + guidance.
2) **Tool schema**: the structured function definitions sent to the model API.

That means the agent sees both “what tools exist” and “how to call them.” If a tool
doesn’t appear in the system prompt or the schema, the model cannot call it.

Commit message:

refactor: rename clawdbot to moltbot with legacy compat

docs/tools/index.md, after:

---
summary: "Agent tool surface for Moltbot (browser, canvas, nodes, message, cron) replacing legacy `moltbot-*` skills"
read_when:
  - Adding or modifying agent tools
  - Retiring or changing `moltbot-*` skills
---

# Tools (Moltbot)

Moltbot exposes **first-class agent tools** for browser, canvas, nodes, and cron.
These replace the old `moltbot-*` skills: the tools are typed, no shelling,
and the agent should rely on them directly.

## Disabling tools

You can globally allow/deny tools via `tools.allow` / `tools.deny` in `moltbot.json`
(deny wins). This prevents disallowed tools from being sent to model providers.

```json5
{
  tools: { deny: ["browser"] }
}
```

Notes:
- Matching is case-insensitive.
- `*` wildcards are supported (`"*"` means all tools).
- If `tools.allow` only references unknown or unloaded plugin tool names, Moltbot logs a warning and ignores the allowlist so core tools stay available.

## Tool profiles (base allowlist)

`tools.profile` sets a **base tool allowlist** before `tools.allow`/`tools.deny`.
Per-agent override: `agents.list[].tools.profile`.

Profiles:
- `minimal`: `session_status` only
- `coding`: `group:fs`, `group:runtime`, `group:sessions`, `group:memory`, `image`
- `messaging`: `group:messaging`, `sessions_list`, `sessions_history`, `sessions_send`, `session_status`
- `full`: no restriction (same as unset)

Example (messaging-only by default, allow Slack + Discord tools too):
```json5
{
  tools: {
    profile: "messaging",
    allow: ["slack", "discord"]
  }
}
```

Example (coding profile, but deny exec/process everywhere):
```json5
{
  tools: {
    profile: "coding",
    deny: ["group:runtime"]
  }
}
```

Example (global coding profile, messaging-only support agent):
```json5
{
  tools: { profile: "coding" },
  agents: {
    list: [
      {
        id: "support",
        tools: { profile: "messaging", allow: ["slack"] }
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

## Provider-specific tool policy

Use `tools.byProvider` to **further restrict** tools for specific providers
(or a single `provider/model`) without changing your global defaults.
Per-agent override: `agents.list[].tools.byProvider`.

This is applied **after** the base tool profile and **before** allow/deny lists,
so it can only narrow the tool set.
Provider keys accept either `provider` (e.g. `google-antigravity`) or
`provider/model` (e.g. `openai/gpt-5.2`).

Example (keep global coding profile, but minimal tools for Google Antigravity):
```json5
{
  tools: {
    profile: "coding",
    byProvider: {
      "google-antigravity": { profile: "minimal" }
    }
  }
}
```

Example (provider/model-specific allowlist for a flaky endpoint):
```json5
{
  tools: {
    allow: ["group:fs", "group:runtime", "sessions_list"],
    byProvider: {
      "openai/gpt-5.2": { allow: ["group:fs", "sessions_list"] }
    }
  }
}
```

Example (agent-specific override for a single provider):
```json5
{
  agents: {
    list: [
      {
        id: "support",
        tools: {
          byProvider: {
            "google-antigravity": { allow: ["message", "sessions_list"] }
          }
        }
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

## Tool groups (shorthands)

Tool policies (global, agent, sandbox) support `group:*` entries that expand to multiple tools.
Use these in `tools.allow` / `tools.deny`.

Available groups:
- `group:runtime`: `exec`, `bash`, `process`
- `group:fs`: `read`, `write`, `edit`, `apply_patch`
- `group:sessions`: `sessions_list`, `sessions_history`, `sessions_send`, `sessions_spawn`, `session_status`
- `group:memory`: `memory_search`, `memory_get`
- `group:web`: `web_search`, `web_fetch`
- `group:ui`: `browser`, `canvas`
- `group:automation`: `cron`, `gateway`
- `group:messaging`: `message`
- `group:nodes`: `nodes`
- `group:moltbot`: all built-in Moltbot tools (excludes provider plugins)

Example (allow only file tools + browser):
```json5
{
  tools: {
    allow: ["group:fs", "browser"]
  }
}
```

## Plugins + tools

Plugins can register **additional tools** (and CLI commands) beyond the core set.
See [Plugins](/plugin) for install + config, and [Skills](/tools/skills) for how
tool usage guidance is injected into prompts. Some plugins ship their own skills
alongside tools (for example, the voice-call plugin).

Optional plugin tools:
- [Lobster](/tools/lobster): typed workflow runtime with resumable approvals (requires the Lobster CLI on the gateway host).
- [LLM Task](/tools/llm-task): JSON-only LLM step for structured workflow output (optional schema validation).

## Tool inventory

### `apply_patch`
Apply structured patches across one or more files. Use for multi-hunk edits.
Experimental: enable via `tools.exec.applyPatch.enabled` (OpenAI models only).

### `exec`
Run shell commands in the workspace.

Core parameters:
- `command` (required)
- `yieldMs` (auto-background after timeout, default 10000)
- `background` (immediate background)
- `timeout` (seconds; kills the process if exceeded, default 1800)
- `elevated` (bool; run on host if elevated mode is enabled/allowed; only changes behavior when the agent is sandboxed)
- `host` (`sandbox | gateway | node`)
- `security` (`deny | allowlist | full`)
- `ask` (`off | on-miss | always`)
- `node` (node id/name for `host=node`)
- Need a real TTY? Set `pty: true`.

Notes:
- Returns `status: "running"` with a `sessionId` when backgrounded.
- Use `process` to poll/log/write/kill/clear background sessions.
- If `process` is disallowed, `exec` runs synchronously and ignores `yieldMs`/`background`.
- `elevated` is gated by `tools.elevated` plus any `agents.list[].tools.elevated` override (both must allow) and is an alias for `host=gateway` + `security=full`.
- `elevated` only changes behavior when the agent is sandboxed (otherwise it’s a no-op).
- `host=node` can target a macOS companion app or a headless node host (`moltbot node run`).
- gateway/node approvals and allowlists: [Exec approvals](/tools/exec-approvals).

### `process`
Manage background exec sessions.

Core actions:
- `list`, `poll`, `log`, `write`, `kill`, `clear`, `remove`

Notes:
- `poll` returns new output and exit status when complete.
- `log` supports line-based `offset`/`limit` (omit `offset` to grab the last N lines).
- `process` is scoped per agent; sessions from other agents are not visible.

### `web_search`
Search the web using Brave Search API.

Core parameters:
- `query` (required)
- `count` (1–10; default from `tools.web.search.maxResults`)

Notes:
- Requires a Brave API key (recommended: `moltbot configure --section web`, or set `BRAVE_API_KEY`).
- Enable via `tools.web.search.enabled`.
- Responses are cached (default 15 min).
- See [Web tools](/tools/web) for setup.

### `web_fetch`
Fetch and extract readable content from a URL (HTML → markdown/text).

Core parameters:
- `url` (required)
- `extractMode` (`markdown` | `text`)
- `maxChars` (truncate long pages)

Notes:
- Enable via `tools.web.fetch.enabled`.
- Responses are cached (default 15 min).
- For JS-heavy sites, prefer the browser tool.
- See [Web tools](/tools/web) for setup.
- See [Firecrawl](/tools/firecrawl) for the optional anti-bot fallback.

### `browser`
Control the dedicated clawd browser.

Core actions:
- `status`, `start`, `stop`, `tabs`, `open`, `focus`, `close`
- `snapshot` (aria/ai)
- `screenshot` (returns image block + `MEDIA:<path>`)
- `act` (UI actions: click/type/press/hover/drag/select/fill/resize/wait/evaluate)
- `navigate`, `console`, `pdf`, `upload`, `dialog`

Profile management:
- `profiles` — list all browser profiles with status
- `create-profile` — create new profile with auto-allocated port (or `cdpUrl`)
- `delete-profile` — stop browser, delete user data, remove from config (local only)
- `reset-profile` — kill orphan process on profile's port (local only)

Common parameters:
- `profile` (optional; defaults to `browser.defaultProfile`)
- `target` (`sandbox` | `host` | `node`)
- `node` (optional; picks a specific node id/name)
Notes:
- Requires `browser.enabled=true` (default is `true`; set `false` to disable).
- All actions accept optional `profile` parameter for multi-instance support.
- When `profile` is omitted, uses `browser.defaultProfile` (defaults to "chrome").
- Profile names: lowercase alphanumeric + hyphens only (max 64 chars).
- Port range: 18800-18899 (~100 profiles max).
- Remote profiles are attach-only (no start/stop/reset).
- If a browser-capable node is connected, the tool may auto-route to it (unless you pin `target`).
- `snapshot` defaults to `ai` when Playwright is installed; use `aria` for the accessibility tree.
- `snapshot` also supports role-snapshot options (`interactive`, `compact`, `depth`, `selector`) which return refs like `e12`.
- `act` requires `ref` from `snapshot` (numeric `12` from AI snapshots, or `e12` from role snapshots); use `evaluate` for rare CSS selector needs.
- Avoid `act` → `wait` by default; use it only in exceptional cases (no reliable UI state to wait on).
- `upload` can optionally pass a `ref` to auto-click after arming.
- `upload` also supports `inputRef` (aria ref) or `element` (CSS selector) to set `<input type="file">` directly.

### `canvas`
Drive the node Canvas (present, eval, snapshot, A2UI).

Core actions:
- `present`, `hide`, `navigate`, `eval`
- `snapshot` (returns image block + `MEDIA:<path>`)
- `a2ui_push`, `a2ui_reset`

Notes:
- Uses gateway `node.invoke` under the hood.
- If no `node` is provided, the tool picks a default (single connected node or local mac node).
- A2UI is v0.8 only (no `createSurface`); the CLI rejects v0.9 JSONL with line errors.
- Quick smoke: `moltbot nodes canvas a2ui push --node <id> --text "Hello from A2UI"`.

### `nodes`
Discover and target paired nodes; send notifications; capture camera/screen.

Core actions:
- `status`, `describe`
- `pending`, `approve`, `reject` (pairing)
- `notify` (macOS `system.notify`)
- `run` (macOS `system.run`)
- `camera_snap`, `camera_clip`, `screen_record`
- `location_get`

Notes:
- Camera/screen commands require the node app to be foregrounded.
- Images return image blocks + `MEDIA:<path>`.
- Videos return `FILE:<path>` (mp4).
- Location returns a JSON payload (lat/lon/accuracy/timestamp).
- `run` params: `command` argv array; optional `cwd`, `env` (`KEY=VAL`), `commandTimeoutMs`, `invokeTimeoutMs`, `needsScreenRecording`.

Example (`run`):
```json
{
  "action": "run",
  "node": "office-mac",
  "command": ["echo", "Hello"],
  "env": ["FOO=bar"],
  "commandTimeoutMs": 12000,
  "invokeTimeoutMs": 45000,
  "needsScreenRecording": false
}
```

### `image`
Analyze an image with the configured image model.

Core parameters:
- `image` (required path or URL)
- `prompt` (optional; defaults to "Describe the image.")
- `model` (optional override)
- `maxBytesMb` (optional size cap)

Notes:
- Only available when `agents.defaults.imageModel` is configured (primary or fallbacks), or when an implicit image model can be inferred from your default model + configured auth (best-effort pairing).
- Uses the image model directly (independent of the main chat model).

### `message`
Send messages and channel actions across Discord/Google Chat/Slack/Telegram/WhatsApp/Signal/iMessage/MS Teams.

Core actions:
- `send` (text + optional media; MS Teams also supports `card` for Adaptive Cards)
- `poll` (WhatsApp/Discord/MS Teams polls)
- `react` / `reactions` / `read` / `edit` / `delete`
- `pin` / `unpin` / `list-pins`
- `permissions`
- `thread-create` / `thread-list` / `thread-reply`
- `search`
- `sticker`
- `member-info` / `role-info`
- `emoji-list` / `emoji-upload` / `sticker-upload`
- `role-add` / `role-remove`
- `channel-info` / `channel-list`
- `voice-status`
- `event-list` / `event-create`
- `timeout` / `kick` / `ban`

Notes:
- `send` routes WhatsApp via the Gateway; other channels go direct.
- `poll` uses the Gateway for WhatsApp and MS Teams; Discord polls go direct.
- When a message tool call is bound to an active chat session, sends are constrained to that session’s target to avoid cross-context leaks.

### `cron`
Manage Gateway cron jobs and wakeups.

Core actions:
- `status`, `list`
- `add`, `update`, `remove`, `run`, `runs`
- `wake` (enqueue system event + optional immediate heartbeat)

Notes:
- `add` expects a full cron job object (same schema as `cron.add` RPC).
- `update` uses `{ id, patch }`.

### `gateway`
Restart or apply updates to the running Gateway process (in-place).

Core actions:
- `restart` (authorizes + sends `SIGUSR1` for in-process restart; `moltbot gateway` restart in-place)
- `config.get` / `config.schema`
- `config.apply` (validate + write config + restart + wake)
- `config.patch` (merge partial update + restart + wake)
- `update.run` (run update + restart + wake)

Notes:
- Use `delayMs` (defaults to 2000) to avoid interrupting an in-flight reply.
- `restart` is disabled by default; enable with `commands.restart: true`.

### `sessions_list` / `sessions_history` / `sessions_send` / `sessions_spawn` / `session_status`
List sessions, inspect transcript history, or send to another session.

Core parameters:
- `sessions_list`: `kinds?`, `limit?`, `activeMinutes?`, `messageLimit?` (0 = none)
- `sessions_history`: `sessionKey` (or `sessionId`), `limit?`, `includeTools?`
- `sessions_send`: `sessionKey` (or `sessionId`), `message`, `timeoutSeconds?` (0 = fire-and-forget)
- `sessions_spawn`: `task`, `label?`, `agentId?`, `model?`, `runTimeoutSeconds?`, `cleanup?`
- `session_status`: `sessionKey?` (default current; accepts `sessionId`), `model?` (`default` clears override)

Notes:
- `main` is the canonical direct-chat key; global/unknown are hidden.
- `messageLimit > 0` fetches last N messages per session (tool messages filtered).
- `sessions_send` waits for final completion when `timeoutSeconds > 0`.
- Delivery/announce happens after completion and is best-effort; `status: "ok"` confirms the agent run finished, not that the announce was delivered.
- `sessions_spawn` starts a sub-agent run and posts an announce reply back to the requester chat.
- `sessions_spawn` is non-blocking and returns `status: "accepted"` immediately.
- `sessions_send` runs a reply‑back ping‑pong (reply `REPLY_SKIP` to stop; max turns via `session.agentToAgent.maxPingPongTurns`, 0–5).
- After the ping‑pong, the target agent runs an **announce step**; reply `ANNOUNCE_SKIP` to suppress the announcement.

### `agents_list`
List agent ids that the current session may target with `sessions_spawn`.

Notes:
- Result is restricted to per-agent allowlists (`agents.list[].subagents.allowAgents`).
- When `["*"]` is configured, the tool includes all configured agents and marks `allowAny: true`.

## Parameters (common)

Gateway-backed tools (`canvas`, `nodes`, `cron`):
- `gatewayUrl` (default `ws://127.0.0.1:18789`)
- `gatewayToken` (if auth enabled)
- `timeoutMs`

Browser tool:
- `profile` (optional; defaults to `browser.defaultProfile`)
- `target` (`sandbox` | `host` | `node`)
- `node` (optional; pin a specific node id/name)

## Recommended agent flows

Browser automation:
1) `browser` → `status` / `start`
2) `snapshot` (ai or aria)
3) `act` (click/type/press)
4) `screenshot` if you need visual confirmation

Canvas render:
1) `canvas` → `present`
2) `a2ui_push` (optional)
3) `snapshot`

Node targeting:
1) `nodes` → `status`
2) `describe` on the chosen node
3) `notify` / `run` / `camera_snap` / `screen_record`

## Safety

- Avoid direct `system.run`; use `nodes` → `run` only with explicit user consent.
- Respect user consent for camera/screen capture.
- Use `status/describe` to ensure permissions before invoking media commands.

## How tools are presented to the agent

Tools are exposed in two parallel channels:

1) **System prompt text**: a human-readable list + guidance.
2) **Tool schema**: the structured function definitions sent to the model API.

That means the agent sees both “what tools exist” and “how to call them.” If a tool
doesn’t appear in the system prompt or the schema, the model cannot call it.
