docs/tools/skills.md, before:

---
summary: "Skills: managed vs workspace, gating rules, and config/env wiring"
read_when:
  - Adding or modifying skills
  - Changing skill gating or load rules
---
# Skills (Clawdbot)

Clawdbot uses **[AgentSkills](https://agentskills.io)-compatible** skill folders to teach the agent how to use tools. Each skill is a directory containing a `SKILL.md` with YAML frontmatter and instructions. Clawdbot loads **bundled skills** plus optional local overrides, and filters them at load time based on environment, config, and binary presence.

## Locations and precedence

Skills are loaded from **three** places:

1) **Bundled skills**: shipped with the install (npm package or Clawdbot.app)
2) **Managed/local skills**: `~/.clawdbot/skills`
3) **Workspace skills**: `<workspace>/skills`

If a skill name conflicts, precedence is:

`<workspace>/skills` (highest) → `~/.clawdbot/skills` → bundled skills (lowest)

Additionally, you can configure extra skill folders (lowest precedence) via
`skills.load.extraDirs` in `~/.clawdbot/clawdbot.json`.

## Per-agent vs shared skills

In **multi-agent** setups, each agent has its own workspace. That means:

- **Per-agent skills** live in `<workspace>/skills` for that agent only.
- **Shared skills** live in `~/.clawdbot/skills` (managed/local) and are visible
  to **all agents** on the same machine.
- **Shared folders** can also be added via `skills.load.extraDirs` (lowest
  precedence) if you want a common skills pack used by multiple agents.

If the same skill name exists in more than one place, the usual precedence
applies: workspace wins, then managed/local, then bundled.

## Plugins + skills

Plugins can ship their own skills (for example, `voice-call`) and gate them via
`metadata.clawdbot.requires.config` on the plugin’s config entry. See
[Plugins](/plugin) for plugin discovery/config and [Tools](/tools) for the tool
surface those skills teach.

## ClawdHub (install + sync)

ClawdHub is the public skills registry for Clawdbot. Browse at
https://clawdhub.com. Use it to discover, install, update, and back up skills.
Full guide: [ClawdHub](/tools/clawdhub).

Common flows:

- Install a skill into your workspace:
  - `clawdhub install <skill-slug>`
- Update all installed skills:
  - `clawdhub update --all`
- Sync (scan + publish updates):
  - `clawdhub sync --all`

By default, `clawdhub` installs into `./skills` under your current working
directory (or falls back to the configured Clawdbot workspace). Clawdbot picks
that up as `<workspace>/skills` on the next session.

## Format (AgentSkills + Pi-compatible)

`SKILL.md` must include at least:

```markdown
---
name: nano-banana-pro
description: Generate or edit images via Gemini 3 Pro Image
---
```

Notes:
- We follow the AgentSkills spec for layout/intent.
- The parser used by the embedded agent supports **single-line** frontmatter keys only.
- `metadata` should be a **single-line JSON object**.
- Use `{baseDir}` in instructions to reference the skill folder path.
- Optional frontmatter keys:
  - `homepage` — URL surfaced as “Website” in the macOS Skills UI (also supported via `metadata.clawdbot.homepage`).
  - `user-invocable` — `true|false` (default: `true`). When `true`, the skill is exposed as a user slash command.
  - `disable-model-invocation` — `true|false` (default: `false`). When `true`, the skill is excluded from the model prompt (still available via user invocation).

## Gating (load-time filters)

Clawdbot **filters skills at load time** using `metadata` (single-line JSON):

```markdown
---
name: nano-banana-pro
description: Generate or edit images via Gemini 3 Pro Image
metadata: {"clawdbot":{"requires":{"bins":["uv"],"env":["GEMINI_API_KEY"],"config":["browser.enabled"]},"primaryEnv":"GEMINI_API_KEY"}}
---
```

Fields under `metadata.clawdbot`:
- `always: true` — always include the skill (skip other gates).
- `emoji` — optional emoji used by the macOS Skills UI.
- `homepage` — optional URL shown as “Website” in the macOS Skills UI.
- `os` — optional list of platforms (`darwin`, `linux`, `win32`). If set, the skill is only eligible on those OSes.
- `requires.bins` — list; each must exist on `PATH`.
- `requires.anyBins` — list; at least one must exist on `PATH`.
- `requires.env` — list; env var must exist **or** be provided in config.
- `requires.config` — list of `clawdbot.json` paths that must be truthy.
- `primaryEnv` — env var name associated with `skills.entries.<name>.apiKey`.
- `install` — optional array of installer specs used by the macOS Skills UI (brew/node/go/uv).

Note on sandboxing:
- `requires.bins` is checked on the **host** at skill load time.
- If an agent is sandboxed, the binary must also exist **inside the container**.
  Install it via `agents.defaults.sandbox.docker.setupCommand` (or a custom image).
  Example: the `summarize` skill (`skills/summarize/SKILL.md`) needs the `summarize` CLI
  in the sandbox container to run there.

Installer example:

```markdown
---
name: gemini
description: Use Gemini CLI for coding assistance and Google search lookups.
metadata: {"clawdbot":{"emoji":"♊️","requires":{"bins":["gemini"]},"install":[{"id":"brew","kind":"brew","formula":"gemini-cli","bins":["gemini"],"label":"Install Gemini CLI (brew)"}]}}
---
```

Notes:
- If multiple installers are listed, the gateway picks a **single** preferred option (brew when available, otherwise node).
- Node installs honor `skills.install.nodeManager` in `clawdbot.json` (default: npm; options: npm/pnpm/yarn/bun).
  This only affects **skill installs**; the Gateway runtime should still be Node
  (Bun is not recommended for WhatsApp/Telegram).
- Go installs: if `go` is missing and `brew` is available, the gateway installs Go via Homebrew first and sets `GOBIN` to Homebrew’s `bin` when possible.

If no `metadata.clawdbot` is present, the skill is always eligible (unless
disabled in config or blocked by `skills.allowBundled` for bundled skills).

## Config overrides (`~/.clawdbot/clawdbot.json`)

Bundled/managed skills can be toggled and supplied with env values:

```json5
{
  skills: {
    entries: {
      "nano-banana-pro": {
        enabled: true,
        apiKey: "GEMINI_KEY_HERE",
        env: {
          GEMINI_API_KEY: "GEMINI_KEY_HERE"
        }
      },
      peekaboo: { enabled: true },
      sag: { enabled: false }
    }
  }
}
```

Note: if the skill name contains hyphens, quote the key (JSON5 allows quoted keys).

Config keys match the **skill name** by default. If a skill defines
`metadata.clawdbot.skillKey`, use that key under `skills.entries`.

Rules:
- `enabled: false` disables the skill even if it’s bundled/installed.
- `env`: injected **only if** the variable isn’t already set in the process.
- `apiKey`: convenience for skills that declare `metadata.clawdbot.primaryEnv`.
- `allowBundled`: optional allowlist for **bundled** skills only. If set, only
  bundled skills in the list are eligible (managed/workspace skills unaffected).

## Environment injection (per agent run)

When an agent run starts, Clawdbot:
1) Reads skill metadata.
2) Applies any `skills.entries.<key>.env` or `skills.entries.<key>.apiKey` to
   `process.env`.
3) Builds the system prompt with **eligible** skills.
4) Restores the original environment after the run ends.

This is **scoped to the agent run**, not a global shell environment.

## Session snapshot (performance)

Clawdbot snapshots the eligible skills **when a session starts** and reuses that list for subsequent turns in the same session. Changes to skills or config take effect on the next new session.

Skills can also refresh mid-session when the skills watcher is enabled or when a new eligible remote node appears (see below). Think of this as a **hot reload**: the refreshed list is picked up on the next agent turn.

## Remote macOS nodes (Linux gateway)

If the Gateway is running on Linux but a **macOS node** is connected **with `system.run` allowed** (Exec approvals security not set to `deny`), Clawdbot can treat macOS-only skills as eligible when the required binaries are present on that node. The agent should execute those skills via the `nodes` tool (typically `nodes.run`).

This relies on the node reporting its command support and on a bin probe via `system.run`. If the macOS node goes offline later, the skills remain visible; invocations may fail until the node reconnects.

## Skills watcher (auto-refresh)

By default, Clawdbot watches skill folders and bumps the skills snapshot when `SKILL.md` files change. Configure this under `skills.load`:

```json5
{
  skills: {
    load: {
      watch: true,
      watchDebounceMs: 250
    }
  }
}
```

## Token impact (skills list)

When skills are eligible, Clawdbot injects a compact XML list of available skills into the system prompt (via `formatSkillsForPrompt` in `pi-coding-agent`). The cost is deterministic:

- **Base overhead (only when ≥1 skill):** 195 characters.
- **Per skill:** 97 characters + the length of the XML-escaped `<name>`, `<description>`, and `<location>` values.

Formula (characters):

```
total = 195 + Σ (97 + len(name_escaped) + len(description_escaped) + len(location_escaped))
```

Notes:
- XML escaping expands `& < > " '` into entities (`&amp;`, `&lt;`, etc.), increasing length.
- Token counts vary by model tokenizer. A rough OpenAI-style estimate is ~4 chars/token, so **97 chars ≈ 24 tokens** per skill plus your actual field lengths.

## Managed skills lifecycle

Clawdbot ships a baseline set of skills as **bundled skills** as part of the
install (npm package or Clawdbot.app). `~/.clawdbot/skills` exists for local
overrides (for example, pinning/patching a skill without changing the bundled
copy). Workspace skills are user-owned and override both on name conflicts.

## Config reference

See [Skills config](/tools/skills-config) for the full configuration schema.

## Looking for more skills?

Browse https://clawdhub.com.

---

Commit message:

feat: auto-recreate sandbox containers on config change

docs/tools/skills.md, after:

---
summary: "Skills: managed vs workspace, gating rules, and config/env wiring"
read_when:
  - Adding or modifying skills
  - Changing skill gating or load rules
---
# Skills (Clawdbot)

Clawdbot uses **[AgentSkills](https://agentskills.io)-compatible** skill folders to teach the agent how to use tools. Each skill is a directory containing a `SKILL.md` with YAML frontmatter and instructions. Clawdbot loads **bundled skills** plus optional local overrides, and filters them at load time based on environment, config, and binary presence.

## Locations and precedence

Skills are loaded from **three** places:

1) **Bundled skills**: shipped with the install (npm package or Clawdbot.app)
2) **Managed/local skills**: `~/.clawdbot/skills`
3) **Workspace skills**: `<workspace>/skills`

If a skill name conflicts, precedence is:

`<workspace>/skills` (highest) → `~/.clawdbot/skills` → bundled skills (lowest)

Additionally, you can configure extra skill folders (lowest precedence) via
`skills.load.extraDirs` in `~/.clawdbot/clawdbot.json`.

## Per-agent vs shared skills

In **multi-agent** setups, each agent has its own workspace. That means:

- **Per-agent skills** live in `<workspace>/skills` for that agent only.
- **Shared skills** live in `~/.clawdbot/skills` (managed/local) and are visible
  to **all agents** on the same machine.
- **Shared folders** can also be added via `skills.load.extraDirs` (lowest
  precedence) if you want a common skills pack used by multiple agents.

If the same skill name exists in more than one place, the usual precedence
applies: workspace wins, then managed/local, then bundled.

## Plugins + skills

Plugins can ship their own skills (for example, `voice-call`) and gate them via
`metadata.clawdbot.requires.config` on the plugin’s config entry. See
[Plugins](/plugin) for plugin discovery/config and [Tools](/tools) for the tool
surface those skills teach.

## ClawdHub (install + sync)

ClawdHub is the public skills registry for Clawdbot. Browse at
https://clawdhub.com. Use it to discover, install, update, and back up skills.
Full guide: [ClawdHub](/tools/clawdhub).

Common flows:

- Install a skill into your workspace:
  - `clawdhub install <skill-slug>`
- Update all installed skills:
  - `clawdhub update --all`
- Sync (scan + publish updates):
  - `clawdhub sync --all`

By default, `clawdhub` installs into `./skills` under your current working
directory (or falls back to the configured Clawdbot workspace). Clawdbot picks
that up as `<workspace>/skills` on the next session.

## Format (AgentSkills + Pi-compatible)

`SKILL.md` must include at least:

```markdown
---
name: nano-banana-pro
description: Generate or edit images via Gemini 3 Pro Image
---
```

Notes:
- We follow the AgentSkills spec for layout/intent.
- The parser used by the embedded agent supports **single-line** frontmatter keys only.
- `metadata` should be a **single-line JSON object**.
- Use `{baseDir}` in instructions to reference the skill folder path.
- Optional frontmatter keys:
  - `homepage` — URL surfaced as “Website” in the macOS Skills UI (also supported via `metadata.clawdbot.homepage`).
  - `user-invocable` — `true|false` (default: `true`). When `true`, the skill is exposed as a user slash command.
  - `disable-model-invocation` — `true|false` (default: `false`). When `true`, the skill is excluded from the model prompt (still available via user invocation).

## Gating (load-time filters)

Clawdbot **filters skills at load time** using `metadata` (single-line JSON):

```markdown
---
name: nano-banana-pro
description: Generate or edit images via Gemini 3 Pro Image
metadata: {"clawdbot":{"requires":{"bins":["uv"],"env":["GEMINI_API_KEY"],"config":["browser.enabled"]},"primaryEnv":"GEMINI_API_KEY"}}
---
```

Fields under `metadata.clawdbot`:
- `always: true` — always include the skill (skip other gates).
- `emoji` — optional emoji used by the macOS Skills UI.
- `homepage` — optional URL shown as “Website” in the macOS Skills UI.
- `os` — optional list of platforms (`darwin`, `linux`, `win32`). If set, the skill is only eligible on those OSes.
- `requires.bins` — list; each must exist on `PATH`.
- `requires.anyBins` — list; at least one must exist on `PATH`.
- `requires.env` — list; env var must exist **or** be provided in config.
- `requires.config` — list of `clawdbot.json` paths that must be truthy.
- `primaryEnv` — env var name associated with `skills.entries.<name>.apiKey`.
- `install` — optional array of installer specs used by the macOS Skills UI (brew/node/go/uv).

Note on sandboxing:
- `requires.bins` is checked on the **host** at skill load time.
- If an agent is sandboxed, the binary must also exist **inside the container**.
  Install it via `agents.defaults.sandbox.docker.setupCommand` (or a custom image).
  `setupCommand` runs once after the container is created.
  Package installs also require network egress, a writable root FS, and a root user in the sandbox.
  Example: the `summarize` skill (`skills/summarize/SKILL.md`) needs the `summarize` CLI
  in the sandbox container to run there.

Installer example:

```markdown
---
name: gemini
description: Use Gemini CLI for coding assistance and Google search lookups.
metadata: {"clawdbot":{"emoji":"♊️","requires":{"bins":["gemini"]},"install":[{"id":"brew","kind":"brew","formula":"gemini-cli","bins":["gemini"],"label":"Install Gemini CLI (brew)"}]}}
---
```

Notes:
- If multiple installers are listed, the gateway picks a **single** preferred option (brew when available, otherwise node).
- Node installs honor `skills.install.nodeManager` in `clawdbot.json` (default: npm; options: npm/pnpm/yarn/bun).
  This only affects **skill installs**; the Gateway runtime should still be Node
  (Bun is not recommended for WhatsApp/Telegram).
- Go installs: if `go` is missing and `brew` is available, the gateway installs Go via Homebrew first and sets `GOBIN` to Homebrew’s `bin` when possible.

If no `metadata.clawdbot` is present, the skill is always eligible (unless
disabled in config or blocked by `skills.allowBundled` for bundled skills).

## Config overrides (`~/.clawdbot/clawdbot.json`)

Bundled/managed skills can be toggled and supplied with env values:

```json5
{
  skills: {
    entries: {
      "nano-banana-pro": {
        enabled: true,
        apiKey: "GEMINI_KEY_HERE",
        env: {
          GEMINI_API_KEY: "GEMINI_KEY_HERE"
        }
      },
      peekaboo: { enabled: true },
      sag: { enabled: false }
    }
  }
}
```

Note: if the skill name contains hyphens, quote the key (JSON5 allows quoted keys).

Config keys match the **skill name** by default. If a skill defines
`metadata.clawdbot.skillKey`, use that key under `skills.entries`.

Rules:
- `enabled: false` disables the skill even if it’s bundled/installed.
- `env`: injected **only if** the variable isn’t already set in the process.
- `apiKey`: convenience for skills that declare `metadata.clawdbot.primaryEnv`.
- `allowBundled`: optional allowlist for **bundled** skills only. If set, only
  bundled skills in the list are eligible (managed/workspace skills unaffected).

## Environment injection (per agent run)

When an agent run starts, Clawdbot:
1) Reads skill metadata.
2) Applies any `skills.entries.<key>.env` or `skills.entries.<key>.apiKey` to
   `process.env`.
3) Builds the system prompt with **eligible** skills.
4) Restores the original environment after the run ends.

This is **scoped to the agent run**, not a global shell environment.

## Session snapshot (performance)

Clawdbot snapshots the eligible skills **when a session starts** and reuses that list for subsequent turns in the same session. Changes to skills or config take effect on the next new session.

Skills can also refresh mid-session when the skills watcher is enabled or when a new eligible remote node appears (see below). Think of this as a **hot reload**: the refreshed list is picked up on the next agent turn.

## Remote macOS nodes (Linux gateway)

If the Gateway is running on Linux but a **macOS node** is connected **with `system.run` allowed** (Exec approvals security not set to `deny`), Clawdbot can treat macOS-only skills as eligible when the required binaries are present on that node. The agent should execute those skills via the `nodes` tool (typically `nodes.run`).

This relies on the node reporting its command support and on a bin probe via `system.run`. If the macOS node goes offline later, the skills remain visible; invocations may fail until the node reconnects.

## Skills watcher (auto-refresh)

By default, Clawdbot watches skill folders and bumps the skills snapshot when `SKILL.md` files change. Configure this under `skills.load`:

```json5
{
  skills: {
    load: {
      watch: true,
      watchDebounceMs: 250
    }
  }
}
```

## Token impact (skills list)

When skills are eligible, Clawdbot injects a compact XML list of available skills into the system prompt (via `formatSkillsForPrompt` in `pi-coding-agent`). The cost is deterministic:

- **Base overhead (only when ≥1 skill):** 195 characters.
- **Per skill:** 97 characters + the length of the XML-escaped `<name>`, `<description>`, and `<location>` values.

Formula (characters):

```
total = 195 + Σ (97 + len(name_escaped) + len(description_escaped) + len(location_escaped))
```

Notes:
- XML escaping expands `& < > " '` into entities (`&amp;`, `&lt;`, etc.), increasing length.
- Token counts vary by model tokenizer. A rough OpenAI-style estimate is ~4 chars/token, so **97 chars ≈ 24 tokens** per skill plus your actual field lengths.

## Managed skills lifecycle

Clawdbot ships a baseline set of skills as **bundled skills** as part of the
install (npm package or Clawdbot.app). `~/.clawdbot/skills` exists for local
overrides (for example, pinning/patching a skill without changing the bundled
copy). Workspace skills are user-owned and override both on name conflicts.

## Config reference

See [Skills config](/tools/skills-config) for the full configuration schema.

## Looking for more skills?

Browse https://clawdhub.com.

---
