docs/tools/thinking.md, before:

---
summary: "Directive syntax for /think + /verbose and how they affect model reasoning"
read_when:
  - Adjusting thinking or verbose directive parsing or defaults
---
# Thinking Levels (/think directives)

## What it does
- Inline directive in any inbound body: `/t <level>`, `/think:<level>`, or `/thinking <level>`.
- Levels (aliases): `off | minimal | low | medium | high | xhigh` (GPT-5.2 + Codex models only)
  - minimal → “think”
  - low → “think hard”
  - medium → “think harder”
  - high → “ultrathink” (max budget)
  - xhigh → “ultrathink+” (GPT-5.2 + Codex models only)
  - `highest`, `max` map to `high`.

## Resolution order
1. Inline directive on the message (applies only to that message).
2. Session override (set by sending a directive-only message).
3. Global default (`agents.defaults.thinkingDefault` in config).
4. Fallback: low for reasoning-capable models; off otherwise.

## Setting a session default
- Send a message that is **only** the directive (whitespace allowed), e.g. `/think:medium` or `/t high`.
- That sticks for the current session (per-sender by default); cleared by `/think:off` or session idle reset.
- Confirmation reply is sent (`Thinking level set to high.` / `Thinking disabled.`). If the level is invalid (e.g. `/thinking big`), the command is rejected with a hint and the session state is left unchanged.
- Send `/think` (or `/think:`) with no argument to see the current thinking level.

## Application by agent
- **Embedded Pi**: the resolved level is passed to the in-process Pi agent runtime.

## Verbose directives (/verbose or /v)
- Levels: `on|full` or `off` (default).
- Directive-only message toggles session verbose and replies `Verbose logging enabled.` / `Verbose logging disabled.`; invalid levels return a hint without changing state.
- `/verbose off` stores an explicit session override; clear it via the Sessions UI by choosing `inherit`.
- Inline directive affects only that message; session/global defaults apply otherwise.
- Send `/verbose` (or `/verbose:`) with no argument to see the current verbose level.
- When verbose is on, agents that emit structured tool results (Pi, other JSON agents) send each tool result back as its own metadata-only message, prefixed with `<emoji> <tool-name>: <arg>` when available (path/command); the tool output itself is not forwarded. These tool summaries are sent as soon as each tool finishes (separate bubbles), not as streaming deltas. If you toggle `/verbose on|off` while a run is in-flight, subsequent tool bubbles honor the new setting.

## Reasoning visibility (/reasoning)
- Levels: `on|off|stream`.
- Directive-only message toggles whether thinking blocks are shown in replies.
- When enabled, reasoning is sent as a **separate message** prefixed with `Reasoning:`.
- `stream` (Telegram only): streams reasoning into the Telegram draft bubble while the reply is generating, then sends the final answer without reasoning.
- Alias: `/reason`.
- Send `/reasoning` (or `/reasoning:`) with no argument to see the current reasoning level.

## Related
- Elevated mode docs live in [Elevated mode](/tools/elevated).

## Heartbeats
- Heartbeat probe body is the configured heartbeat prompt (default: `Read HEARTBEAT.md if exists. Consider outstanding tasks. Checkup sometimes on your human during (user local) day time.`). Inline directives in a heartbeat message apply as usual (but avoid changing session defaults from heartbeats).
- Heartbeat delivery defaults to the final payload only. To also send the separate `Reasoning:` message (when available), set `agents.defaults.heartbeat.includeReasoning: true`.

## Web chat UI
- The web chat thinking selector mirrors the session's stored level from the inbound session store/config when the page loads.
- Picking another level applies only to the next message (`thinkingOnce`); after sending, the selector snaps back to the stored session level.
- To change the session default, send a `/think:<level>` directive (as before); the selector will reflect it after the next reload.

Commit message:

feat: add per-agent heartbeat config

docs/tools/thinking.md, after:

---
summary: "Directive syntax for /think + /verbose and how they affect model reasoning"
read_when:
  - Adjusting thinking or verbose directive parsing or defaults
---
# Thinking Levels (/think directives)

## What it does
- Inline directive in any inbound body: `/t <level>`, `/think:<level>`, or `/thinking <level>`.
- Levels (aliases): `off | minimal | low | medium | high | xhigh` (GPT-5.2 + Codex models only)
  - minimal → “think”
  - low → “think hard”
  - medium → “think harder”
  - high → “ultrathink” (max budget)
  - xhigh → “ultrathink+” (GPT-5.2 + Codex models only)
  - `highest`, `max` map to `high`.

## Resolution order
1. Inline directive on the message (applies only to that message).
2. Session override (set by sending a directive-only message).
3. Global default (`agents.defaults.thinkingDefault` in config).
4. Fallback: low for reasoning-capable models; off otherwise.

## Setting a session default
- Send a message that is **only** the directive (whitespace allowed), e.g. `/think:medium` or `/t high`.
- That sticks for the current session (per-sender by default); cleared by `/think:off` or session idle reset.
- Confirmation reply is sent (`Thinking level set to high.` / `Thinking disabled.`). If the level is invalid (e.g. `/thinking big`), the command is rejected with a hint and the session state is left unchanged.
- Send `/think` (or `/think:`) with no argument to see the current thinking level.

## Application by agent
- **Embedded Pi**: the resolved level is passed to the in-process Pi agent runtime.

## Verbose directives (/verbose or /v)
- Levels: `on|full` or `off` (default).
- Directive-only message toggles session verbose and replies `Verbose logging enabled.` / `Verbose logging disabled.`; invalid levels return a hint without changing state.
- `/verbose off` stores an explicit session override; clear it via the Sessions UI by choosing `inherit`.
- Inline directive affects only that message; session/global defaults apply otherwise.
- Send `/verbose` (or `/verbose:`) with no argument to see the current verbose level.
- When verbose is on, agents that emit structured tool results (Pi, other JSON agents) send each tool result back as its own metadata-only message, prefixed with `<emoji> <tool-name>: <arg>` when available (path/command); the tool output itself is not forwarded. These tool summaries are sent as soon as each tool finishes (separate bubbles), not as streaming deltas. If you toggle `/verbose on|off` while a run is in-flight, subsequent tool bubbles honor the new setting.

## Reasoning visibility (/reasoning)
- Levels: `on|off|stream`.
- Directive-only message toggles whether thinking blocks are shown in replies.
- When enabled, reasoning is sent as a **separate message** prefixed with `Reasoning:`.
- `stream` (Telegram only): streams reasoning into the Telegram draft bubble while the reply is generating, then sends the final answer without reasoning.
- Alias: `/reason`.
- Send `/reasoning` (or `/reasoning:`) with no argument to see the current reasoning level.

## Related
- Elevated mode docs live in [Elevated mode](/tools/elevated).

## Heartbeats
- Heartbeat probe body is the configured heartbeat prompt (default: `Read HEARTBEAT.md if it exists (workspace context). Follow it strictly. Do not infer or repeat old tasks from prior chats. If nothing needs attention, reply HEARTBEAT_OK.`). Inline directives in a heartbeat message apply as usual (but avoid changing session defaults from heartbeats).
- Heartbeat delivery defaults to the final payload only. To also send the separate `Reasoning:` message (when available), set `agents.defaults.heartbeat.includeReasoning: true` or per-agent `agents.list[].heartbeat.includeReasoning: true`.

## Web chat UI
- The web chat thinking selector mirrors the session's stored level from the inbound session store/config when the page loads.
- Picking another level applies only to the next message (`thinkingOnce`); after sending, the selector snaps back to the stored session level.
- To change the session default, send a `/think:<level>` directive (as before); the selector will reflect it after the next reload.
