docs/gateway/local-models.md, before:

---
summary: "Run Clawdbot on local LLMs (LM Studio, vLLM, LiteLLM, custom OpenAI endpoints)"
read_when:
  - You want to serve models from your own GPU box
  - You are wiring LM Studio or an OpenAI-compatible proxy
  - You need the safest local model guidance
---
# Local models

Local is doable, but Clawdbot expects large context + strong defenses against prompt injection. Small cards truncate context and leak safety. Aim high: **≥2 maxed-out Mac Studios or equivalent GPU rig (~$30k+)**. A single **24 GB** GPU works only for lighter prompts with higher latency.

## Recommended: LM Studio + MiniMax M2.1 (Responses API)

Best current local stack. Load MiniMax M2.1 in LM Studio, enable the local server (default `http://127.0.0.1:1234`), and use Responses API to keep reasoning separate from final text.

```json5
{
  agents: {
    defaults: {
      model: { primary: "lmstudio/minimax-m2.1-gs32" },
      models: {
        "anthropic/claude-opus-4-5": { alias: "Opus" },
        "lmstudio/minimax-m2.1-gs32": { alias: "Minimax" }
      }
    }
  },
  models: {
    mode: "merge",
    providers: {
      lmstudio: {
        baseUrl: "http://127.0.0.1:1234/v1",
        apiKey: "lmstudio",
        api: "openai-responses",
        models: [
          {
            id: "minimax-m2.1-gs32",
            name: "MiniMax M2.1 GS32",
            reasoning: false,
            input: ["text"],
            cost: { input: 0, output: 0, cacheRead: 0, cacheWrite: 0 },
            contextWindow: 196608,
            maxTokens: 8192
          }
        ]
      }
    }
  }
}
```

**Setup checklist**
- Install LM Studio: https://lmstudio.ai
- In LM Studio, download MiniMax M2.1, start the server, confirm `http://127.0.0.1:1234/v1/models` lists it.
- Keep the model loaded; cold-load adds startup latency.
- Adjust `contextWindow`/`maxTokens` if your LM Studio build differs.
- For WhatsApp, stick to Responses API so only final text is sent.

## Other OpenAI-compatible local proxies

vLLM, LiteLLM, OAI-proxy, or custom gateways work if they expose an OpenAI-style `/v1` endpoint. Replace the provider block above with your endpoint and model ID:

```json5
{
  models: {
    mode: "merge",
    providers: {
      local: {
        baseUrl: "http://127.0.0.1:8000/v1",
        apiKey: "sk-local",
        api: "openai-responses",
        models: [
          {
            id: "my-local-model",
            name: "Local Model",
            reasoning: false,
            input: ["text"],
            cost: { input: 0, output: 0, cacheRead: 0, cacheWrite: 0 },
            contextWindow: 120000,
            maxTokens: 8192
          }
        ]
      }
    }
  }
}
```

Keep `models.mode: "merge"` so hosted models stay available as fallbacks.

## Troubleshooting
- Gateway can reach the proxy? `curl http://127.0.0.1:1234/v1/models`.
- LM Studio model unloaded? Reload; cold start is a common “hanging” cause.
- Context errors? Lower `contextWindow` or raise your server limit.
- Safety: local models skip provider-side filters; keep agents narrow and compaction on to limit prompt injection blast radius.

Commit message:

docs: harden local model guidance

docs/gateway/local-models.md, after:

---
summary: "Run Clawdbot on local LLMs (LM Studio, vLLM, LiteLLM, custom OpenAI endpoints)"
read_when:
  - You want to serve models from your own GPU box
  - You are wiring LM Studio or an OpenAI-compatible proxy
  - You need the safest local model guidance
---
# Local models

Local is doable, but Clawdbot expects large context + strong defenses against prompt injection. Small cards truncate context and leak safety. Aim high: **≥2 maxed-out Mac Studios or equivalent GPU rig (~$30k+)**. A single **24 GB** GPU works only for lighter prompts with higher latency. Use the **largest / full-size model variant you can run**; aggressively quantized or “small” checkpoints raise prompt-injection risk (see [Security](/gateway/security)).

## Recommended: LM Studio + MiniMax M2.1 (Responses API, full-size)

Best current local stack. Load MiniMax M2.1 in LM Studio, enable the local server (default `http://127.0.0.1:1234`), and use Responses API to keep reasoning separate from final text.

```json5
{
  agents: {
    defaults: {
      model: { primary: "lmstudio/minimax-m2.1-gs32" },
      models: {
        "anthropic/claude-opus-4-5": { alias: "Opus" },
        "lmstudio/minimax-m2.1-gs32": { alias: "Minimax" }
      }
    }
  },
  models: {
    mode: "merge",
    providers: {
      lmstudio: {
        baseUrl: "http://127.0.0.1:1234/v1",
        apiKey: "lmstudio",
        api: "openai-responses",
        models: [
          {
            id: "minimax-m2.1-gs32",
            name: "MiniMax M2.1 GS32",
            reasoning: false,
            input: ["text"],
            cost: { input: 0, output: 0, cacheRead: 0, cacheWrite: 0 },
            contextWindow: 196608,
            maxTokens: 8192
          }
        ]
      }
    }
  }
}
```

**Setup checklist**
- Install LM Studio: https://lmstudio.ai
- In LM Studio, download the **largest MiniMax M2.1 build available** (avoid “small”/heavily quantized variants), start the server, confirm `http://127.0.0.1:1234/v1/models` lists it.
- Keep the model loaded; cold-load adds startup latency.
- Adjust `contextWindow`/`maxTokens` if your LM Studio build differs.
- For WhatsApp, stick to Responses API so only final text is sent.

## Other OpenAI-compatible local proxies

vLLM, LiteLLM, OAI-proxy, or custom gateways work if they expose an OpenAI-style `/v1` endpoint. Replace the provider block above with your endpoint and model ID:

```json5
{
  models: {
    mode: "merge",
    providers: {
      local: {
        baseUrl: "http://127.0.0.1:8000/v1",
        apiKey: "sk-local",
        api: "openai-responses",
        models: [
          {
            id: "my-local-model",
            name: "Local Model",
            reasoning: false,
            input: ["text"],
            cost: { input: 0, output: 0, cacheRead: 0, cacheWrite: 0 },
            contextWindow: 120000,
            maxTokens: 8192
          }
        ]
      }
    }
  }
}
```

Keep `models.mode: "merge"` so hosted models stay available as fallbacks.

## Troubleshooting
- Gateway can reach the proxy? `curl http://127.0.0.1:1234/v1/models`.
- LM Studio model unloaded? Reload; cold start is a common “hanging” cause.
- Context errors? Lower `contextWindow` or raise your server limit.
- Safety: local models skip provider-side filters; keep agents narrow and compaction on to limit prompt injection blast radius.
