docs/gateway/openai-http-api.md, before:

---
summary: "Expose an OpenAI-compatible /v1/chat/completions HTTP endpoint from the Gateway"
read_when:
  - Integrating tools that expect OpenAI Chat Completions
title: "OpenAI Chat Completions"
---

# OpenAI Chat Completions (HTTP)

OpenClaw’s Gateway can serve a small OpenAI-compatible Chat Completions endpoint.

This endpoint is **disabled by default**. Enable it in config first.

- `POST /v1/chat/completions`
- Same port as the Gateway (WS + HTTP multiplex): `http://<gateway-host>:<port>/v1/chat/completions`

Under the hood, requests are executed as a normal Gateway agent run (same codepath as `openclaw agent`), so routing/permissions/config match your Gateway.

## Authentication

Uses the Gateway auth configuration. Send a bearer token:

- `Authorization: Bearer <token>`

Notes:

- When `gateway.auth.mode="token"`, use `gateway.auth.token` (or `OPENCLAW_GATEWAY_TOKEN`).
- When `gateway.auth.mode="password"`, use `gateway.auth.password` (or `OPENCLAW_GATEWAY_PASSWORD`).

## Choosing an agent

No custom headers required: encode the agent id in the OpenAI `model` field:

- `model: "openclaw:<agentId>"` (example: `"openclaw:main"`, `"openclaw:beta"`)
- `model: "agent:<agentId>"` (alias)

Or target a specific OpenClaw agent by header:

- `x-openclaw-agent-id: <agentId>` (default: `main`)

Advanced:

- `x-openclaw-session-key: <sessionKey>` to fully control session routing.

## Enabling the endpoint

Set `gateway.http.endpoints.chatCompletions.enabled` to `true`:

```json5
{
  gateway: {
    http: {
      endpoints: {
        chatCompletions: { enabled: true },
      },
    },
  },
}
```

## Disabling the endpoint

Set `gateway.http.endpoints.chatCompletions.enabled` to `false`:

```json5
{
  gateway: {
    http: {
      endpoints: {
        chatCompletions: { enabled: false },
      },
    },
  },
}
```

## Session behavior

By default the endpoint is **stateless per request** (a new session key is generated each call).

If the request includes an OpenAI `user` string, the Gateway derives a stable session key from it, so repeated calls can share an agent session.

## Streaming (SSE)

Set `stream: true` to receive Server-Sent Events (SSE):

- `Content-Type: text/event-stream`
- Each event line is `data: <json>`
- Stream ends with `data: [DONE]`

## Examples

Non-streaming:

```bash
curl -sS http://127.0.0.1:18789/v1/chat/completions \
  -H 'Authorization: Bearer YOUR_TOKEN' \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  -H 'x-openclaw-agent-id: main' \
  -d '{
    "model": "openclaw",
    "messages": [{"role":"user","content":"hi"}]
  }'
```

Streaming:

```bash
curl -N http://127.0.0.1:18789/v1/chat/completions \
  -H 'Authorization: Bearer YOUR_TOKEN' \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  -H 'x-openclaw-agent-id: main' \
  -d '{
    "model": "openclaw",
    "stream": true,
    "messages": [{"role":"user","content":"hi"}]
  }'
```

Commit message:

feat(gateway): add auth rate-limiting & brute-force protection (#15035)
* feat(gateway): add auth rate-limiting & brute-force protection

Add a per-IP sliding-window rate limiter to Gateway authentication
endpoints (HTTP, WebSocket upgrade, and WS message-level auth).

When gateway.auth.rateLimit is configured, failed auth attempts are
tracked per client IP. Once the threshold is exceeded within the
sliding window, further attempts are blocked with HTTP 429 + Retry-After
until the lockout period expires. Loopback addresses are exempt by
default so local CLI sessions are never locked out.

The limiter is only created when explicitly configured (undefined
otherwise), keeping the feature fully opt-in and backward-compatible.

* fix(gateway): isolate auth rate-limit scopes and normalize 429 responses

---------

Co-authored-by: buerbaumer <buerbaumer@users.noreply.github.com>
Co-authored-by: Peter Steinberger <steipete@gmail.com>

docs/gateway/openai-http-api.md, after:

---
summary: "Expose an OpenAI-compatible /v1/chat/completions HTTP endpoint from the Gateway"
read_when:
  - Integrating tools that expect OpenAI Chat Completions
title: "OpenAI Chat Completions"
---

# OpenAI Chat Completions (HTTP)

OpenClaw’s Gateway can serve a small OpenAI-compatible Chat Completions endpoint.

This endpoint is **disabled by default**. Enable it in config first.

- `POST /v1/chat/completions`
- Same port as the Gateway (WS + HTTP multiplex): `http://<gateway-host>:<port>/v1/chat/completions`

Under the hood, requests are executed as a normal Gateway agent run (same codepath as `openclaw agent`), so routing/permissions/config match your Gateway.

## Authentication

Uses the Gateway auth configuration. Send a bearer token:

- `Authorization: Bearer <token>`

Notes:

- When `gateway.auth.mode="token"`, use `gateway.auth.token` (or `OPENCLAW_GATEWAY_TOKEN`).
- When `gateway.auth.mode="password"`, use `gateway.auth.password` (or `OPENCLAW_GATEWAY_PASSWORD`).
- If `gateway.auth.rateLimit` is configured and too many auth failures occur, the endpoint returns `429` with `Retry-After`.

## Choosing an agent

No custom headers required: encode the agent id in the OpenAI `model` field:

- `model: "openclaw:<agentId>"` (example: `"openclaw:main"`, `"openclaw:beta"`)
- `model: "agent:<agentId>"` (alias)

Or target a specific OpenClaw agent by header:

- `x-openclaw-agent-id: <agentId>` (default: `main`)

Advanced:

- `x-openclaw-session-key: <sessionKey>` to fully control session routing.

## Enabling the endpoint

Set `gateway.http.endpoints.chatCompletions.enabled` to `true`:

```json5
{
  gateway: {
    http: {
      endpoints: {
        chatCompletions: { enabled: true },
      },
    },
  },
}
```

## Disabling the endpoint

Set `gateway.http.endpoints.chatCompletions.enabled` to `false`:

```json5
{
  gateway: {
    http: {
      endpoints: {
        chatCompletions: { enabled: false },
      },
    },
  },
}
```

## Session behavior

By default the endpoint is **stateless per request** (a new session key is generated each call).

If the request includes an OpenAI `user` string, the Gateway derives a stable session key from it, so repeated calls can share an agent session.

## Streaming (SSE)

Set `stream: true` to receive Server-Sent Events (SSE):

- `Content-Type: text/event-stream`
- Each event line is `data: <json>`
- Stream ends with `data: [DONE]`

## Examples

Non-streaming:

```bash
curl -sS http://127.0.0.1:18789/v1/chat/completions \
  -H 'Authorization: Bearer YOUR_TOKEN' \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  -H 'x-openclaw-agent-id: main' \
  -d '{
    "model": "openclaw",
    "messages": [{"role":"user","content":"hi"}]
  }'
```

Streaming:

```bash
curl -N http://127.0.0.1:18789/v1/chat/completions \
  -H 'Authorization: Bearer YOUR_TOKEN' \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  -H 'x-openclaw-agent-id: main' \
  -d '{
    "model": "openclaw",
    "stream": true,
    "messages": [{"role":"user","content":"hi"}]
  }'
```
