docs/start/setup.md, before:

---
summary: "Setup guide: keep your Clawdbot setup tailored while staying up-to-date"
read_when:
  - Setting up a new machine
  - You want “latest + greatest” without breaking your personal setup
---

# Setup

Last updated: 2026-01-01

## TL;DR
- **Tailoring lives outside the repo:** `~/clawd` (workspace) + `~/.clawdbot/clawdbot.json` (config).
- **Stable workflow:** install the macOS app; let it run the bundled Gateway.
- **Bleeding edge workflow:** run the Gateway yourself via `pnpm gateway:watch`, then point the macOS app at it using **Debug Settings → Gateway → Attach only**.

## Prereqs (from source)
- Node `>=22`
- `pnpm`
- Docker (optional; only for containerized setup/e2e — see [Docker](/install/docker))

## Tailoring strategy (so updates don’t hurt)

If you want “100% tailored to me” *and* easy updates, keep your customization in:

- **Config:** `~/.clawdbot/clawdbot.json` (JSON/JSON5-ish)
- **Workspace:** `~/clawd` (skills, prompts, memories; make it a private git repo)

Bootstrap once:

```bash
clawdbot setup
```

From inside this repo, use the local CLI entry:

```bash
pnpm clawdbot setup
```

## Stable workflow (macOS app first)

1) Install + launch **Clawdbot.app** (menu bar).
2) Complete the onboarding/permissions checklist (TCC prompts).
3) Ensure Gateway is **Local** and running (the app manages it).
4) Link surfaces (example: WhatsApp):

```bash
clawdbot providers login
```

5) Sanity check:

```bash
clawdbot health
```

If onboarding is not available in your build:
- Run `clawdbot setup`, then `clawdbot providers login`, then start the Gateway manually (`clawdbot gateway`).

## Bleeding edge workflow (Gateway in a terminal)

Goal: work on the TypeScript Gateway, get hot reload, keep the macOS app UI attached.

### 0) (Optional) Run the macOS app from source too

If you also want the macOS app on the bleeding edge:

```bash
./scripts/restart-mac.sh
```

### 1) Start the dev Gateway

```bash
pnpm install
pnpm gateway:watch
```

`gateway:watch` runs the gateway in watch mode and reloads on TypeScript changes.

### 2) Point the macOS app at your running Gateway

In **Clawdbot.app**:

- Connection Mode: **Local**
- Settings → **Debug Settings** → **Gateway** → enable **Attach only**

This makes the app **only connect to an already-running gateway** and **never spawn** its own.

### 3) Verify

- In-app Gateway status should read **“Using existing gateway …”**
- Or via CLI:

```bash
pnpm clawdbot health
```

### Common footguns
- **Attach only enabled, but nothing is running:** app shows “Attach-only enabled; no gateway to attach”.
- **Wrong port:** Gateway WS defaults to `ws://127.0.0.1:18789`; keep app + CLI on the same port.
- **Where state lives:**
  - Credentials: `~/.clawdbot/credentials/`
  - Sessions: `~/.clawdbot/agents/<agentId>/sessions/`
  - Logs: `/tmp/clawdbot/`

## Updating (without wrecking your setup)

- Keep `~/clawd` and `~/.clawdbot/` as “your stuff”; don’t put personal prompts/config into the `clawdbot` repo.
- Updating source: `git pull` + `pnpm install` (when lockfile changed) + keep using `pnpm gateway:watch`.

## Linux (systemd user service)

Linux installs use a systemd **user** service. By default, systemd stops user
services on logout/idle, which kills the Gateway. Onboarding attempts to enable
lingering for you (may prompt for sudo). If it’s still off, run:

```bash
sudo loginctl enable-linger $USER
```

For always-on or multi-user servers, consider a **system** service instead of a
user service (no lingering needed). See [Gateway runbook](/gateway) for the systemd notes.

## Related docs

- [Gateway runbook](/gateway) (flags, supervision, ports)
- [Gateway configuration](/gateway/configuration) (config schema + examples)
- [Discord](/providers/discord) and [Telegram](/providers/telegram) (reply tags + replyToMode settings)
- [Clawdbot assistant setup](/start/clawd)
- [macOS app](/platforms/macos) (gateway lifecycle + “Attach only”)

Commit message:

refactor: remove mac attach-only setting

docs/start/setup.md, after:

---
summary: "Setup guide: keep your Clawdbot setup tailored while staying up-to-date"
read_when:
  - Setting up a new machine
  - You want “latest + greatest” without breaking your personal setup
---

# Setup

Last updated: 2026-01-01

## TL;DR
- **Tailoring lives outside the repo:** `~/clawd` (workspace) + `~/.clawdbot/clawdbot.json` (config).
- **Stable workflow:** install the macOS app; let it run the bundled Gateway.
- **Bleeding edge workflow:** run the Gateway yourself via `pnpm gateway:watch`, then let the macOS app attach in Local mode.

## Prereqs (from source)
- Node `>=22`
- `pnpm`
- Docker (optional; only for containerized setup/e2e — see [Docker](/install/docker))

## Tailoring strategy (so updates don’t hurt)

If you want “100% tailored to me” *and* easy updates, keep your customization in:

- **Config:** `~/.clawdbot/clawdbot.json` (JSON/JSON5-ish)
- **Workspace:** `~/clawd` (skills, prompts, memories; make it a private git repo)

Bootstrap once:

```bash
clawdbot setup
```

From inside this repo, use the local CLI entry:

```bash
pnpm clawdbot setup
```

## Stable workflow (macOS app first)

1) Install + launch **Clawdbot.app** (menu bar).
2) Complete the onboarding/permissions checklist (TCC prompts).
3) Ensure Gateway is **Local** and running (the app manages it).
4) Link surfaces (example: WhatsApp):

```bash
clawdbot providers login
```

5) Sanity check:

```bash
clawdbot health
```

If onboarding is not available in your build:
- Run `clawdbot setup`, then `clawdbot providers login`, then start the Gateway manually (`clawdbot gateway`).

## Bleeding edge workflow (Gateway in a terminal)

Goal: work on the TypeScript Gateway, get hot reload, keep the macOS app UI attached.

### 0) (Optional) Run the macOS app from source too

If you also want the macOS app on the bleeding edge:

```bash
./scripts/restart-mac.sh
```

### 1) Start the dev Gateway

```bash
pnpm install
pnpm gateway:watch
```

`gateway:watch` runs the gateway in watch mode and reloads on TypeScript changes.

### 2) Point the macOS app at your running Gateway

In **Clawdbot.app**:

- Connection Mode: **Local**
The app will attach to the running gateway on the configured port.

### 3) Verify

- In-app Gateway status should read **“Using existing gateway …”**
- Or via CLI:

```bash
pnpm clawdbot health
```

### Common footguns
- **Wrong port:** Gateway WS defaults to `ws://127.0.0.1:18789`; keep app + CLI on the same port.
- **Where state lives:**
  - Credentials: `~/.clawdbot/credentials/`
  - Sessions: `~/.clawdbot/agents/<agentId>/sessions/`
  - Logs: `/tmp/clawdbot/`

## Updating (without wrecking your setup)

- Keep `~/clawd` and `~/.clawdbot/` as “your stuff”; don’t put personal prompts/config into the `clawdbot` repo.
- Updating source: `git pull` + `pnpm install` (when lockfile changed) + keep using `pnpm gateway:watch`.

## Linux (systemd user service)

Linux installs use a systemd **user** service. By default, systemd stops user
services on logout/idle, which kills the Gateway. Onboarding attempts to enable
lingering for you (may prompt for sudo). If it’s still off, run:

```bash
sudo loginctl enable-linger $USER
```

For always-on or multi-user servers, consider a **system** service instead of a
user service (no lingering needed). See [Gateway runbook](/gateway) for the systemd notes.

## Related docs

- [Gateway runbook](/gateway) (flags, supervision, ports)
- [Gateway configuration](/gateway/configuration) (config schema + examples)
- [Discord](/providers/discord) and [Telegram](/providers/telegram) (reply tags + replyToMode settings)
- [Clawdbot assistant setup](/start/clawd)
- [macOS app](/platforms/macos) (gateway lifecycle)
