docs/plugin.md, before:

---
summary: "Clawdbot plugins/extensions: discovery, config, and safety"
read_when:
  - Adding or modifying plugins/extensions
  - Documenting plugin install or load rules
---
# Plugins (Extensions)

## Quick start (new to plugins?)

A plugin is just a **small code module** that extends Clawdbot with extra
features (commands, tools, and Gateway RPC).

Most of the time, you’ll use plugins when you want a feature that’s not built
into core Clawdbot yet (or you want to keep optional features out of your main
install).

Fast path:

1) See what’s already loaded:

```bash
clawdbot plugins list
```

2) Install an official plugin (example: Voice Call):

```bash
clawdbot plugins install @clawdbot/voice-call
```

3) Restart the Gateway, then configure under `plugins.entries.<id>.config`.

See [Voice Call](/plugins/voice-call) for a concrete example plugin.

## Available plugins (official)

- Microsoft Teams is plugin-only as of 2026.1.15; install `@clawdbot/msteams` if you use Teams.
- Memory (Core) — bundled memory search plugin (enabled by default via `plugins.slots.memory`)
- Memory (LanceDB) — bundled long-term memory plugin (auto-recall/capture; set `plugins.slots.memory = "memory-lancedb"`)
- [Voice Call](/plugins/voice-call) — `@clawdbot/voice-call`
- [Zalo Personal](/plugins/zalouser) — `@clawdbot/zalouser`
- [Matrix](/channels/matrix) — `@clawdbot/matrix`
- [Zalo](/channels/zalo) — `@clawdbot/zalo`
- [Microsoft Teams](/channels/msteams) — `@clawdbot/msteams`
- Google Antigravity OAuth (provider auth) — bundled as `google-antigravity-auth` (disabled by default)
- Gemini CLI OAuth (provider auth) — bundled as `google-gemini-cli-auth` (disabled by default)
- Qwen OAuth (provider auth) — bundled as `qwen-portal-auth` (disabled by default)
- Copilot Proxy (provider auth) — local VS Code Copilot Proxy bridge; distinct from built-in `github-copilot` device login (bundled, disabled by default)

Clawdbot plugins are **TypeScript modules** loaded at runtime via jiti. **Config
validation does not execute plugin code**; it uses the plugin manifest and JSON
Schema instead. See [Plugin manifest](/plugins/manifest).

Plugins can register:

- Gateway RPC methods
- Gateway HTTP handlers
- Agent tools
- CLI commands
- Background services
- Optional config validation

Plugins run **in‑process** with the Gateway, so treat them as trusted code.
Tool authoring guide: [Plugin agent tools](/plugins/agent-tools).

## Discovery & precedence

Clawdbot scans, in order:

1) Config paths
- `plugins.load.paths` (file or directory)

2) Workspace extensions
- `<workspace>/.clawdbot/extensions/*.ts`
- `<workspace>/.clawdbot/extensions/*/index.ts`

3) Global extensions
- `~/.clawdbot/extensions/*.ts`
- `~/.clawdbot/extensions/*/index.ts`

4) Bundled extensions (shipped with Clawdbot, **disabled by default**)
- `<clawdbot>/extensions/*`

Bundled plugins must be enabled explicitly via `plugins.entries.<id>.enabled`
or `clawdbot plugins enable <id>`. Installed plugins are enabled by default,
but can be disabled the same way.

Each plugin must include a `clawdbot.plugin.json` file in its root. If a path
points at a file, the plugin root is the file's directory and must contain the
manifest.

If multiple plugins resolve to the same id, the first match in the order above
wins and lower-precedence copies are ignored.

### Package packs

A plugin directory may include a `package.json` with `clawdbot.extensions`:

```json
{
  "name": "my-pack",
  "clawdbot": {
    "extensions": ["./src/safety.ts", "./src/tools.ts"]
  }
}
```

Each entry becomes a plugin. If the pack lists multiple extensions, the plugin id
becomes `name/<fileBase>`.

If your plugin imports npm deps, install them in that directory so
`node_modules` is available (`npm install` / `pnpm install`).

### Channel catalog metadata

Channel plugins can advertise onboarding metadata via `clawdbot.channel` and
install hints via `clawdbot.install`. This keeps the core catalog data-free.

Example:

```json
{
  "name": "@clawdbot/nextcloud-talk",
  "clawdbot": {
    "extensions": ["./index.ts"],
    "channel": {
      "id": "nextcloud-talk",
      "label": "Nextcloud Talk",
      "selectionLabel": "Nextcloud Talk (self-hosted)",
      "docsPath": "/channels/nextcloud-talk",
      "docsLabel": "nextcloud-talk",
      "blurb": "Self-hosted chat via Nextcloud Talk webhook bots.",
      "order": 65,
      "aliases": ["nc-talk", "nc"]
    },
    "install": {
      "npmSpec": "@clawdbot/nextcloud-talk",
      "localPath": "extensions/nextcloud-talk",
      "defaultChoice": "npm"
    }
  }
}
```

## Plugin IDs

Default plugin ids:

- Package packs: `package.json` `name`
- Standalone file: file base name (`~/.../voice-call.ts` → `voice-call`)

If a plugin exports `id`, Clawdbot uses it but warns when it doesn’t match the
configured id.

## Config

```json5
{
  plugins: {
    enabled: true,
    allow: ["voice-call"],
    deny: ["untrusted-plugin"],
    load: { paths: ["~/Projects/oss/voice-call-extension"] },
    entries: {
      "voice-call": { enabled: true, config: { provider: "twilio" } }
    }
  }
}
```

Fields:
- `enabled`: master toggle (default: true)
- `allow`: allowlist (optional)
- `deny`: denylist (optional; deny wins)
- `load.paths`: extra plugin files/dirs
- `entries.<id>`: per‑plugin toggles + config

Config changes **require a gateway restart**.

Validation rules (strict):
- Unknown plugin ids in `entries`, `allow`, `deny`, or `slots` are **errors**.
- Unknown `channels.<id>` keys are **errors** unless a plugin manifest declares
  the channel id.
- Plugin config is validated using the JSON Schema embedded in
  `clawdbot.plugin.json` (`configSchema`).
- If a plugin is disabled, its config is preserved and a **warning** is emitted.

## Plugin slots (exclusive categories)

Some plugin categories are **exclusive** (only one active at a time). Use
`plugins.slots` to select which plugin owns the slot:

```json5
{
  plugins: {
    slots: {
      memory: "memory-core" // or "none" to disable memory plugins
    }
  }
}
```

If multiple plugins declare `kind: "memory"`, only the selected one loads. Others
are disabled with diagnostics.

## Control UI (schema + labels)

The Control UI uses `config.schema` (JSON Schema + `uiHints`) to render better forms.

Clawdbot augments `uiHints` at runtime based on discovered plugins:

- Adds per-plugin labels for `plugins.entries.<id>` / `.enabled` / `.config`
- Merges optional plugin-provided config field hints under:
  `plugins.entries.<id>.config.<field>`

If you want your plugin config fields to show good labels/placeholders (and mark secrets as sensitive),
provide `uiHints` alongside your JSON Schema in the plugin manifest.

Example:

```json
{
  "id": "my-plugin",
  "configSchema": {
    "type": "object",
    "additionalProperties": false,
    "properties": {
      "apiKey": { "type": "string" },
      "region": { "type": "string" }
    }
  },
  "uiHints": {
    "apiKey": { "label": "API Key", "sensitive": true },
    "region": { "label": "Region", "placeholder": "us-east-1" }
  }
}
```

## CLI

```bash
clawdbot plugins list
clawdbot plugins info <id>
clawdbot plugins install <path>                 # copy a local file/dir into ~/.clawdbot/extensions/<id>
clawdbot plugins install ./extensions/voice-call # relative path ok
clawdbot plugins install ./plugin.tgz           # install from a local tarball
clawdbot plugins install ./plugin.zip           # install from a local zip
clawdbot plugins install -l ./extensions/voice-call # link (no copy) for dev
clawdbot plugins install @clawdbot/voice-call # install from npm
clawdbot plugins update <id>
clawdbot plugins update --all
clawdbot plugins enable <id>
clawdbot plugins disable <id>
clawdbot plugins doctor
```

`plugins update` only works for npm installs tracked under `plugins.installs`.

Plugins may also register their own top‑level commands (example: `clawdbot voicecall`).

## Plugin API (overview)

Plugins export either:

- A function: `(api) => { ... }`
- An object: `{ id, name, configSchema, register(api) { ... } }`

## Plugin hooks

Plugins can ship hooks and register them at runtime. This lets a plugin bundle
event-driven automation without a separate hook pack install.

### Example

```
import { registerPluginHooksFromDir } from "clawdbot/plugin-sdk";

export default function register(api) {
  registerPluginHooksFromDir(api, "./hooks");
}
```

Notes:
- Hook directories follow the normal hook structure (`HOOK.md` + `handler.ts`).
- Hook eligibility rules still apply (OS/bins/env/config requirements).
- Plugin-managed hooks show up in `clawdbot hooks list` with `plugin:<id>`.
- You cannot enable/disable plugin-managed hooks via `clawdbot hooks`; enable/disable the plugin instead.

## Provider plugins (model auth)

Plugins can register **model provider auth** flows so users can run OAuth or
API-key setup inside Clawdbot (no external scripts needed).

Register a provider via `api.registerProvider(...)`. Each provider exposes one
or more auth methods (OAuth, API key, device code, etc.). These methods power:

- `clawdbot models auth login --provider <id> [--method <id>]`

Example:

```ts
api.registerProvider({
  id: "acme",
  label: "AcmeAI",
  auth: [
    {
      id: "oauth",
      label: "OAuth",
      kind: "oauth",
      run: async (ctx) => {
        // Run OAuth flow and return auth profiles.
        return {
          profiles: [
            {
              profileId: "acme:default",
              credential: {
                type: "oauth",
                provider: "acme",
                access: "...",
                refresh: "...",
                expires: Date.now() + 3600 * 1000,
              },
            },
          ],
          defaultModel: "acme/opus-1",
        };
      },
    },
  ],
});
```

Notes:
- `run` receives a `ProviderAuthContext` with `prompter`, `runtime`,
  `openUrl`, and `oauth.createVpsAwareHandlers` helpers.
- Return `configPatch` when you need to add default models or provider config.
- Return `defaultModel` so `--set-default` can update agent defaults.

### Register a messaging channel

Plugins can register **channel plugins** that behave like built‑in channels
(WhatsApp, Telegram, etc.). Channel config lives under `channels.<id>` and is
validated by your channel plugin code.

```ts
const myChannel = {
  id: "acmechat",
  meta: {
    id: "acmechat",
    label: "AcmeChat",
    selectionLabel: "AcmeChat (API)",
    docsPath: "/channels/acmechat",
    blurb: "demo channel plugin.",
    aliases: ["acme"],
  },
  capabilities: { chatTypes: ["direct"] },
  config: {
    listAccountIds: (cfg) => Object.keys(cfg.channels?.acmechat?.accounts ?? {}),
    resolveAccount: (cfg, accountId) =>
      (cfg.channels?.acmechat?.accounts?.[accountId ?? "default"] ?? { accountId }),
  },
  outbound: {
    deliveryMode: "direct",
    sendText: async () => ({ ok: true }),
  },
};

export default function (api) {
  api.registerChannel({ plugin: myChannel });
}
```

Notes:
- Put config under `channels.<id>` (not `plugins.entries`).
- `meta.label` is used for labels in CLI/UI lists.
- `meta.aliases` adds alternate ids for normalization and CLI inputs.

### Write a new messaging channel (step‑by‑step)

Use this when you want a **new chat surface** (a “messaging channel”), not a model provider.
Model provider docs live under `/providers/*`.

1) Pick an id + config shape
- All channel config lives under `channels.<id>`.
- Prefer `channels.<id>.accounts.<accountId>` for multi‑account setups.

2) Define the channel metadata
- `meta.label`, `meta.selectionLabel`, `meta.docsPath`, `meta.blurb` control CLI/UI lists.
- `meta.docsPath` should point at a docs page like `/channels/<id>`.

3) Implement the required adapters
- `config.listAccountIds` + `config.resolveAccount`
- `capabilities` (chat types, media, threads, etc.)
- `outbound.deliveryMode` + `outbound.sendText` (for basic send)

4) Add optional adapters as needed
- `setup` (wizard), `security` (DM policy), `status` (health/diagnostics)
- `gateway` (start/stop/login), `mentions`, `threading`, `streaming`
- `actions` (message actions), `commands` (native command behavior)

5) Register the channel in your plugin
- `api.registerChannel({ plugin })`

Minimal config example:

```json5
{
  channels: {
    acmechat: {
      accounts: {
        default: { token: "ACME_TOKEN", enabled: true }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

Minimal channel plugin (outbound‑only):

```ts
const plugin = {
  id: "acmechat",
  meta: {
    id: "acmechat",
    label: "AcmeChat",
    selectionLabel: "AcmeChat (API)",
    docsPath: "/channels/acmechat",
    blurb: "AcmeChat messaging channel.",
    aliases: ["acme"],
  },
  capabilities: { chatTypes: ["direct"] },
  config: {
    listAccountIds: (cfg) => Object.keys(cfg.channels?.acmechat?.accounts ?? {}),
    resolveAccount: (cfg, accountId) =>
      (cfg.channels?.acmechat?.accounts?.[accountId ?? "default"] ?? { accountId }),
  },
  outbound: {
    deliveryMode: "direct",
    sendText: async ({ text }) => {
      // deliver `text` to your channel here
      return { ok: true };
    },
  },
};

export default function (api) {
  api.registerChannel({ plugin });
}
```

Load the plugin (extensions dir or `plugins.load.paths`), restart the gateway,
then configure `channels.<id>` in your config.

### Agent tools

See the dedicated guide: [Plugin agent tools](/plugins/agent-tools).

### Register a gateway RPC method

```ts
export default function (api) {
  api.registerGatewayMethod("myplugin.status", ({ respond }) => {
    respond(true, { ok: true });
  });
}
```

### Register CLI commands

```ts
export default function (api) {
  api.registerCli(({ program }) => {
    program.command("mycmd").action(() => {
      console.log("Hello");
    });
  }, { commands: ["mycmd"] });
}
```

### Register background services

```ts
export default function (api) {
  api.registerService({
    id: "my-service",
    start: () => api.logger.info("ready"),
    stop: () => api.logger.info("bye"),
  });
}
```

## Naming conventions

- Gateway methods: `pluginId.action` (example: `voicecall.status`)
- Tools: `snake_case` (example: `voice_call`)
- CLI commands: kebab or camel, but avoid clashing with core commands

## Skills

Plugins can ship a skill in the repo (`skills/<name>/SKILL.md`).
Enable it with `plugins.entries.<id>.enabled` (or other config gates) and ensure
it’s present in your workspace/managed skills locations.

## Distribution (npm)

Recommended packaging:

- Main package: `clawdbot` (this repo)
- Plugins: separate npm packages under `@clawdbot/*` (example: `@clawdbot/voice-call`)

Publishing contract:

- Plugin `package.json` must include `clawdbot.extensions` with one or more entry files.
- Entry files can be `.js` or `.ts` (jiti loads TS at runtime).
- `clawdbot plugins install <npm-spec>` uses `npm pack`, extracts into `~/.clawdbot/extensions/<id>/`, and enables it in config.
- Config key stability: scoped packages are normalized to the **unscoped** id for `plugins.entries.*`.

## Example plugin: Voice Call

This repo includes a voice‑call plugin (Twilio or log fallback):

- Source: `extensions/voice-call`
- Skill: `skills/voice-call`
- CLI: `clawdbot voicecall start|status`
- Tool: `voice_call`
- RPC: `voicecall.start`, `voicecall.status`
- Config (twilio): `provider: "twilio"` + `twilio.accountSid/authToken/from` (optional `statusCallbackUrl`, `twimlUrl`)
- Config (dev): `provider: "log"` (no network)

See [Voice Call](/plugins/voice-call) and `extensions/voice-call/README.md` for setup and usage.

## Safety notes

Plugins run in-process with the Gateway. Treat them as trusted code:

- Only install plugins you trust.
- Prefer `plugins.allow` allowlists.
- Restart the Gateway after changes.

## Testing plugins

Plugins can (and should) ship tests:

- In-repo plugins can keep Vitest tests under `src/**` (example: `src/plugins/voice-call.plugin.test.ts`).
- Separately published plugins should run their own CI (lint/build/test) and validate `clawdbot.extensions` points at the built entrypoint (`dist/index.js`).

Commit message:

refactor: extend channel plugin boundary

docs/plugin.md, after:

---
summary: "Clawdbot plugins/extensions: discovery, config, and safety"
read_when:
  - Adding or modifying plugins/extensions
  - Documenting plugin install or load rules
---
# Plugins (Extensions)

## Quick start (new to plugins?)

A plugin is just a **small code module** that extends Clawdbot with extra
features (commands, tools, and Gateway RPC).

Most of the time, you’ll use plugins when you want a feature that’s not built
into core Clawdbot yet (or you want to keep optional features out of your main
install).

Fast path:

1) See what’s already loaded:

```bash
clawdbot plugins list
```

2) Install an official plugin (example: Voice Call):

```bash
clawdbot plugins install @clawdbot/voice-call
```

3) Restart the Gateway, then configure under `plugins.entries.<id>.config`.

See [Voice Call](/plugins/voice-call) for a concrete example plugin.

## Available plugins (official)

- Microsoft Teams is plugin-only as of 2026.1.15; install `@clawdbot/msteams` if you use Teams.
- Memory (Core) — bundled memory search plugin (enabled by default via `plugins.slots.memory`)
- Memory (LanceDB) — bundled long-term memory plugin (auto-recall/capture; set `plugins.slots.memory = "memory-lancedb"`)
- [Voice Call](/plugins/voice-call) — `@clawdbot/voice-call`
- [Zalo Personal](/plugins/zalouser) — `@clawdbot/zalouser`
- [Matrix](/channels/matrix) — `@clawdbot/matrix`
- [Zalo](/channels/zalo) — `@clawdbot/zalo`
- [Microsoft Teams](/channels/msteams) — `@clawdbot/msteams`
- Google Antigravity OAuth (provider auth) — bundled as `google-antigravity-auth` (disabled by default)
- Gemini CLI OAuth (provider auth) — bundled as `google-gemini-cli-auth` (disabled by default)
- Qwen OAuth (provider auth) — bundled as `qwen-portal-auth` (disabled by default)
- Copilot Proxy (provider auth) — local VS Code Copilot Proxy bridge; distinct from built-in `github-copilot` device login (bundled, disabled by default)

Clawdbot plugins are **TypeScript modules** loaded at runtime via jiti. **Config
validation does not execute plugin code**; it uses the plugin manifest and JSON
Schema instead. See [Plugin manifest](/plugins/manifest).

Plugins can register:

- Gateway RPC methods
- Gateway HTTP handlers
- Agent tools
- CLI commands
- Background services
- Optional config validation

Plugins run **in‑process** with the Gateway, so treat them as trusted code.
Tool authoring guide: [Plugin agent tools](/plugins/agent-tools).

## Discovery & precedence

Clawdbot scans, in order:

1) Config paths
- `plugins.load.paths` (file or directory)

2) Workspace extensions
- `<workspace>/.clawdbot/extensions/*.ts`
- `<workspace>/.clawdbot/extensions/*/index.ts`

3) Global extensions
- `~/.clawdbot/extensions/*.ts`
- `~/.clawdbot/extensions/*/index.ts`

4) Bundled extensions (shipped with Clawdbot, **disabled by default**)
- `<clawdbot>/extensions/*`

Bundled plugins must be enabled explicitly via `plugins.entries.<id>.enabled`
or `clawdbot plugins enable <id>`. Installed plugins are enabled by default,
but can be disabled the same way.

Each plugin must include a `clawdbot.plugin.json` file in its root. If a path
points at a file, the plugin root is the file's directory and must contain the
manifest.

If multiple plugins resolve to the same id, the first match in the order above
wins and lower-precedence copies are ignored.

### Package packs

A plugin directory may include a `package.json` with `clawdbot.extensions`:

```json
{
  "name": "my-pack",
  "clawdbot": {
    "extensions": ["./src/safety.ts", "./src/tools.ts"]
  }
}
```

Each entry becomes a plugin. If the pack lists multiple extensions, the plugin id
becomes `name/<fileBase>`.

If your plugin imports npm deps, install them in that directory so
`node_modules` is available (`npm install` / `pnpm install`).

### Channel catalog metadata

Channel plugins can advertise onboarding metadata via `clawdbot.channel` and
install hints via `clawdbot.install`. This keeps the core catalog data-free.

Example:

```json
{
  "name": "@clawdbot/nextcloud-talk",
  "clawdbot": {
    "extensions": ["./index.ts"],
    "channel": {
      "id": "nextcloud-talk",
      "label": "Nextcloud Talk",
      "selectionLabel": "Nextcloud Talk (self-hosted)",
      "docsPath": "/channels/nextcloud-talk",
      "docsLabel": "nextcloud-talk",
      "blurb": "Self-hosted chat via Nextcloud Talk webhook bots.",
      "order": 65,
      "aliases": ["nc-talk", "nc"]
    },
    "install": {
      "npmSpec": "@clawdbot/nextcloud-talk",
      "localPath": "extensions/nextcloud-talk",
      "defaultChoice": "npm"
    }
  }
}
```

## Plugin IDs

Default plugin ids:

- Package packs: `package.json` `name`
- Standalone file: file base name (`~/.../voice-call.ts` → `voice-call`)

If a plugin exports `id`, Clawdbot uses it but warns when it doesn’t match the
configured id.

## Config

```json5
{
  plugins: {
    enabled: true,
    allow: ["voice-call"],
    deny: ["untrusted-plugin"],
    load: { paths: ["~/Projects/oss/voice-call-extension"] },
    entries: {
      "voice-call": { enabled: true, config: { provider: "twilio" } }
    }
  }
}
```

Fields:
- `enabled`: master toggle (default: true)
- `allow`: allowlist (optional)
- `deny`: denylist (optional; deny wins)
- `load.paths`: extra plugin files/dirs
- `entries.<id>`: per‑plugin toggles + config

Config changes **require a gateway restart**.

Validation rules (strict):
- Unknown plugin ids in `entries`, `allow`, `deny`, or `slots` are **errors**.
- Unknown `channels.<id>` keys are **errors** unless a plugin manifest declares
  the channel id.
- Plugin config is validated using the JSON Schema embedded in
  `clawdbot.plugin.json` (`configSchema`).
- If a plugin is disabled, its config is preserved and a **warning** is emitted.

## Plugin slots (exclusive categories)

Some plugin categories are **exclusive** (only one active at a time). Use
`plugins.slots` to select which plugin owns the slot:

```json5
{
  plugins: {
    slots: {
      memory: "memory-core" // or "none" to disable memory plugins
    }
  }
}
```

If multiple plugins declare `kind: "memory"`, only the selected one loads. Others
are disabled with diagnostics.

## Control UI (schema + labels)

The Control UI uses `config.schema` (JSON Schema + `uiHints`) to render better forms.

Clawdbot augments `uiHints` at runtime based on discovered plugins:

- Adds per-plugin labels for `plugins.entries.<id>` / `.enabled` / `.config`
- Merges optional plugin-provided config field hints under:
  `plugins.entries.<id>.config.<field>`

If you want your plugin config fields to show good labels/placeholders (and mark secrets as sensitive),
provide `uiHints` alongside your JSON Schema in the plugin manifest.

Example:

```json
{
  "id": "my-plugin",
  "configSchema": {
    "type": "object",
    "additionalProperties": false,
    "properties": {
      "apiKey": { "type": "string" },
      "region": { "type": "string" }
    }
  },
  "uiHints": {
    "apiKey": { "label": "API Key", "sensitive": true },
    "region": { "label": "Region", "placeholder": "us-east-1" }
  }
}
```

## CLI

```bash
clawdbot plugins list
clawdbot plugins info <id>
clawdbot plugins install <path>                 # copy a local file/dir into ~/.clawdbot/extensions/<id>
clawdbot plugins install ./extensions/voice-call # relative path ok
clawdbot plugins install ./plugin.tgz           # install from a local tarball
clawdbot plugins install ./plugin.zip           # install from a local zip
clawdbot plugins install -l ./extensions/voice-call # link (no copy) for dev
clawdbot plugins install @clawdbot/voice-call # install from npm
clawdbot plugins update <id>
clawdbot plugins update --all
clawdbot plugins enable <id>
clawdbot plugins disable <id>
clawdbot plugins doctor
```

`plugins update` only works for npm installs tracked under `plugins.installs`.

Plugins may also register their own top‑level commands (example: `clawdbot voicecall`).

## Plugin API (overview)

Plugins export either:

- A function: `(api) => { ... }`
- An object: `{ id, name, configSchema, register(api) { ... } }`

## Plugin hooks

Plugins can ship hooks and register them at runtime. This lets a plugin bundle
event-driven automation without a separate hook pack install.

### Example

```
import { registerPluginHooksFromDir } from "clawdbot/plugin-sdk";

export default function register(api) {
  registerPluginHooksFromDir(api, "./hooks");
}
```

Notes:
- Hook directories follow the normal hook structure (`HOOK.md` + `handler.ts`).
- Hook eligibility rules still apply (OS/bins/env/config requirements).
- Plugin-managed hooks show up in `clawdbot hooks list` with `plugin:<id>`.
- You cannot enable/disable plugin-managed hooks via `clawdbot hooks`; enable/disable the plugin instead.

## Provider plugins (model auth)

Plugins can register **model provider auth** flows so users can run OAuth or
API-key setup inside Clawdbot (no external scripts needed).

Register a provider via `api.registerProvider(...)`. Each provider exposes one
or more auth methods (OAuth, API key, device code, etc.). These methods power:

- `clawdbot models auth login --provider <id> [--method <id>]`

Example:

```ts
api.registerProvider({
  id: "acme",
  label: "AcmeAI",
  auth: [
    {
      id: "oauth",
      label: "OAuth",
      kind: "oauth",
      run: async (ctx) => {
        // Run OAuth flow and return auth profiles.
        return {
          profiles: [
            {
              profileId: "acme:default",
              credential: {
                type: "oauth",
                provider: "acme",
                access: "...",
                refresh: "...",
                expires: Date.now() + 3600 * 1000,
              },
            },
          ],
          defaultModel: "acme/opus-1",
        };
      },
    },
  ],
});
```

Notes:
- `run` receives a `ProviderAuthContext` with `prompter`, `runtime`,
  `openUrl`, and `oauth.createVpsAwareHandlers` helpers.
- Return `configPatch` when you need to add default models or provider config.
- Return `defaultModel` so `--set-default` can update agent defaults.

### Register a messaging channel

Plugins can register **channel plugins** that behave like built‑in channels
(WhatsApp, Telegram, etc.). Channel config lives under `channels.<id>` and is
validated by your channel plugin code.

```ts
const myChannel = {
  id: "acmechat",
  meta: {
    id: "acmechat",
    label: "AcmeChat",
    selectionLabel: "AcmeChat (API)",
    docsPath: "/channels/acmechat",
    blurb: "demo channel plugin.",
    aliases: ["acme"],
  },
  capabilities: { chatTypes: ["direct"] },
  config: {
    listAccountIds: (cfg) => Object.keys(cfg.channels?.acmechat?.accounts ?? {}),
    resolveAccount: (cfg, accountId) =>
      (cfg.channels?.acmechat?.accounts?.[accountId ?? "default"] ?? { accountId }),
  },
  outbound: {
    deliveryMode: "direct",
    sendText: async () => ({ ok: true }),
  },
};

export default function (api) {
  api.registerChannel({ plugin: myChannel });
}
```

Notes:
- Put config under `channels.<id>` (not `plugins.entries`).
- `meta.label` is used for labels in CLI/UI lists.
- `meta.aliases` adds alternate ids for normalization and CLI inputs.
- `meta.preferOver` lists channel ids to skip auto-enable when both are configured.
- `meta.detailLabel` and `meta.systemImage` let UIs show richer channel labels/icons.

### Write a new messaging channel (step‑by‑step)

Use this when you want a **new chat surface** (a “messaging channel”), not a model provider.
Model provider docs live under `/providers/*`.

1) Pick an id + config shape
- All channel config lives under `channels.<id>`.
- Prefer `channels.<id>.accounts.<accountId>` for multi‑account setups.

2) Define the channel metadata
- `meta.label`, `meta.selectionLabel`, `meta.docsPath`, `meta.blurb` control CLI/UI lists.
- `meta.docsPath` should point at a docs page like `/channels/<id>`.
- `meta.preferOver` lets a plugin replace another channel (auto-enable prefers it).
- `meta.detailLabel` and `meta.systemImage` are used by UIs for detail text/icons.

3) Implement the required adapters
- `config.listAccountIds` + `config.resolveAccount`
- `capabilities` (chat types, media, threads, etc.)
- `outbound.deliveryMode` + `outbound.sendText` (for basic send)

4) Add optional adapters as needed
- `setup` (wizard), `security` (DM policy), `status` (health/diagnostics)
- `gateway` (start/stop/login), `mentions`, `threading`, `streaming`
- `actions` (message actions), `commands` (native command behavior)

5) Register the channel in your plugin
- `api.registerChannel({ plugin })`

Minimal config example:

```json5
{
  channels: {
    acmechat: {
      accounts: {
        default: { token: "ACME_TOKEN", enabled: true }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

Minimal channel plugin (outbound‑only):

```ts
const plugin = {
  id: "acmechat",
  meta: {
    id: "acmechat",
    label: "AcmeChat",
    selectionLabel: "AcmeChat (API)",
    docsPath: "/channels/acmechat",
    blurb: "AcmeChat messaging channel.",
    aliases: ["acme"],
  },
  capabilities: { chatTypes: ["direct"] },
  config: {
    listAccountIds: (cfg) => Object.keys(cfg.channels?.acmechat?.accounts ?? {}),
    resolveAccount: (cfg, accountId) =>
      (cfg.channels?.acmechat?.accounts?.[accountId ?? "default"] ?? { accountId }),
  },
  outbound: {
    deliveryMode: "direct",
    sendText: async ({ text }) => {
      // deliver `text` to your channel here
      return { ok: true };
    },
  },
};

export default function (api) {
  api.registerChannel({ plugin });
}
```

Load the plugin (extensions dir or `plugins.load.paths`), restart the gateway,
then configure `channels.<id>` in your config.

### Agent tools

See the dedicated guide: [Plugin agent tools](/plugins/agent-tools).

### Register a gateway RPC method

```ts
export default function (api) {
  api.registerGatewayMethod("myplugin.status", ({ respond }) => {
    respond(true, { ok: true });
  });
}
```

### Register CLI commands

```ts
export default function (api) {
  api.registerCli(({ program }) => {
    program.command("mycmd").action(() => {
      console.log("Hello");
    });
  }, { commands: ["mycmd"] });
}
```

### Register background services

```ts
export default function (api) {
  api.registerService({
    id: "my-service",
    start: () => api.logger.info("ready"),
    stop: () => api.logger.info("bye"),
  });
}
```

## Naming conventions

- Gateway methods: `pluginId.action` (example: `voicecall.status`)
- Tools: `snake_case` (example: `voice_call`)
- CLI commands: kebab or camel, but avoid clashing with core commands

## Skills

Plugins can ship a skill in the repo (`skills/<name>/SKILL.md`).
Enable it with `plugins.entries.<id>.enabled` (or other config gates) and ensure
it’s present in your workspace/managed skills locations.

## Distribution (npm)

Recommended packaging:

- Main package: `clawdbot` (this repo)
- Plugins: separate npm packages under `@clawdbot/*` (example: `@clawdbot/voice-call`)

Publishing contract:

- Plugin `package.json` must include `clawdbot.extensions` with one or more entry files.
- Entry files can be `.js` or `.ts` (jiti loads TS at runtime).
- `clawdbot plugins install <npm-spec>` uses `npm pack`, extracts into `~/.clawdbot/extensions/<id>/`, and enables it in config.
- Config key stability: scoped packages are normalized to the **unscoped** id for `plugins.entries.*`.

## Example plugin: Voice Call

This repo includes a voice‑call plugin (Twilio or log fallback):

- Source: `extensions/voice-call`
- Skill: `skills/voice-call`
- CLI: `clawdbot voicecall start|status`
- Tool: `voice_call`
- RPC: `voicecall.start`, `voicecall.status`
- Config (twilio): `provider: "twilio"` + `twilio.accountSid/authToken/from` (optional `statusCallbackUrl`, `twimlUrl`)
- Config (dev): `provider: "log"` (no network)

See [Voice Call](/plugins/voice-call) and `extensions/voice-call/README.md` for setup and usage.

## Safety notes

Plugins run in-process with the Gateway. Treat them as trusted code:

- Only install plugins you trust.
- Prefer `plugins.allow` allowlists.
- Restart the Gateway after changes.

## Testing plugins

Plugins can (and should) ship tests:

- In-repo plugins can keep Vitest tests under `src/**` (example: `src/plugins/voice-call.plugin.test.ts`).
- Separately published plugins should run their own CI (lint/build/test) and validate `clawdbot.extensions` points at the built entrypoint (`dist/index.js`).
